The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 24, September 10,
1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 24, September 10, 1870

Author: Various

Release Date: November 10, 2003 [EBook #10032]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 1, NO. 24 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           CONANT'S                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PATENT BINDERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO,"                        |
  |                                                              |
  |  to preserve the paper for binding will be sent postpaid on  |
  |                  receipt of One Dollar, by                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               83 Nassau Street, New York City.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                        Carbolic Salve                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Recommended by Physicians.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |     The best Salve in use for all disorders of the Skin,     |
  |                 for Cuts, Burns, Wounds, &c.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                      USED IN HOSPITALS                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SOLD BY ALL DRUGGISTS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                       PRICE 25 CENTS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |               JOHN F. HENRY, Sole Proprietor,                |
  |                No. 8 College Place, New York.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |     These Pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and     |
  | cheaper than any other Pen in the market. Special attention  |
  |  is called to the following grades, as being better suited   |
  |     for business purposes than any pen manufactured. The     |
  |                                                              |
  |            "505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"            |
  |                                                              |
  |            we recommend for Bank and Office use.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                Sole Agent for United States.                 |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Vol. I. No. 24.


PUNCHINELLO


SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1870.



PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD,

By ORPHEUS C. KERR,

Continued in this Number.


See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound Volume No. 1.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |               The first volume of PUNCHINELLO,               |
  |               ending with No. 26 September 24,               |
  |                            1870.                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound in Fine Cloth.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |            will be ready for delivery on Oct. 1,             |
  |                            1870.                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |           Sent postpaid to any part of the United            |
  |                 States on receipt of price.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |              A copy of the paper for one year,               |
  |              from October 1st, No. 27, and the               |
  |              Bound Volume (the latter prepaid,)              |
  |          will be sent to any subscriber for $5.50.           |
  |                                                              |
  |             Three copies for one year, and three             |
  |             Bound Volumes, with an extra copy of             |
  |             Bound Volume, to any person sending              |
  |              us three subscriptions for $16.50.              |
  |                                                              |
  |               One copy of paper for one year,                |
  |                 with a fine chromo premium,                  |
  |                     for            $4.00                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                Single copies, mailed free .10                |
  |                                                              |
  |             Back numbers can always be supplied,             |
  |                 as the paper is elecrotyped.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                Book canvassers will find this                |
  |                           volume a                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Very Saleable Book.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              Orders supplied at a very liberal               |
  |                          discount.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              All remittances should be made in               |
  |                     Post Office orders.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |               Canvassers wanted for the paper                |
  |                         everywhere.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                 Punchinello Publishing Co.,                  |
  |                     83 Nassau St., N.Y.                      |
  |                      P.O. Box No. 2783                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO NEWS-DEALERS.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Punchinello's Monthly.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                 The Weekly Numbers for July.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bound in a Handsome Cover,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               Is now ready. Price Fifty Cents.               |
  |                                                              |
  |                          THE TRADE                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Supplied by the                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |           Who are now prepared to receive Orders.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       WEVILL & HAMMAR,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Wood Engravers,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                        208 Broadway,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bowling Green Savings-Bank                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         33 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.             |
  |                                                              |
  |             _Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents             |
  |         to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be received._          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Six per Cent interest,                    |
  |                   Free of Government Tax.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            Commences on the First of every Month.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   HENRY SMITH, _President_                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary._                |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |        WALTER ROCHE, EDWARD HOGAN, _Vice-Presidents_.        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         NEWS DEALERS                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                              ON                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                         RAIL-ROADS,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEAMBOATS,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                            And at                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                       WATERING PLACES,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |               Will find the Monthly Numbers of               |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |      For April, May, June, and July, an attractive and       |
  |                        Saleable Work.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Single Copies Price 50 cts.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |        For trade price address American News Co., or         |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                        Nassau Street.                        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       FORST & AVERELL                        |
  |                                                              |
  |             Steam, Lithograph, and Letter Press              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          PRINTERS,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               EMBOSSERS, ENGRAVERS, AND LABEL                |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |      Sketches and Estimates furnished upon application.      |
  |                                                              |
  |           23 Platt Street, and 20-22 Gold Street,            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       [P.O. Box 2845.]                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           FOLEY'S                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          GOLD PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    THE BEST AND CHEAPEST.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                        256 BROADWAY.                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    $2 to ALBANY and TROY.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |     The Day Line Steamboats C. Vibbard and Daniel Drew,      |
  |  commencing May 31, will leave Vestry st. Pier at 8.45, and  |
  | Thirty-fourth st. at 9 a.m., landing at Yonkers,(Nyack, and  |
  |   Tarrytown by ferry-boat), Cozzens, West Point, Cornwall,   |
  |    Newburgh, Poughkeepsie, Rhinebeck, Bristol, Catskill,     |
  |  Hudson, and New-Baltimore. A special train of broad-gauge   |
  | cars in connection with the day boats will leave on arrival  |
  |   at Albany (commencing June 20) for Sharon Springs. Fare    |
  |   $4.25 from New York and for Cherry Valley. The Steamboat   |
  |     Seneca will transfer passengers from Albany to Troy.     |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         J.M. Sprague                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Is the Authorized Agent of                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                           For the                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                     New England States,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |     To Procure Subscriptions, and to Employ Canvassors.      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      HENRY L. STEPHENS,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                           ARTIST,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 Fulton Street,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       GEO. B. BOWLEND,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Draughtsman & Designer                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 Fulton Street,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Room No. 11, NEW YORK.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.

AN ADAPTATION.

BY ORPHEUS C. KERR.

CHAPTER XVII.

INSURANCE AND ASSURANCE.

Six months had come and gone and done it; the weather was as
inordinately hot as it had before been intolerably cold; and the
Reverend OCTAVIUS SIMPSON stood waiting, in the gorgeous Office of the
Boreal Life Insurance Company, New York, for the appearance of Mr.
MELANCTHON SCHENCK.

Having been directed by a superb young clerk, who parted his hair in the
middle, to "just stand out of the passage-way and amuse yourself with
one of our Schedules for awhile," until the great life-Agent should come
in, the Gospeler read a few schedulistic pages, proving, that if a
person had his life Insured at the age of Thirty, and paid his premiums
regularly until he was Eighty-five, the cost to him and profit to the
Company would, probably, be much more than the amount he had insured
for. It must, then, be evident to him, that, upon his death, at Ninety,
the Company would have received, in all, sufficient funds from him to
pay the full amount of his Policy to the lady whom he had always
introduced as his wife, and still retain enough to declare a handsome
Dividend for itself. Such was the sound business-principle upon which
the Boreal was conducted; and the merest child must perceive, that only
the extremely unlikely coincidence of at least four insurers all dying
before Eighty-five could endanger the solvency of the beneficent
institution.--Having mastered this convincing argument, and become
greatly confused by its plausibility, Mr. SIMPSON next gave some
attention to what was going on around him in the Office, and allowed his
overwrought mind to relax cheerfully in contemplation thereof. One of
human nature's peculiarities was quite amusingly exemplified in the
different treatment accorded to callers who were "safe risks," and to
those who were not. Thus, the whisper of "Here comes old Tubercles,
again!" was prevalent amongst the clerks upon the entrance of a very
thin, narrow-chested old gentleman, whom they informed, with
considerable humor, that he was only wasting hours which should be spent
with a spiritual adviser, in his useless attempts to take out a Policy
in _that_ office. The Boreal couldn't insure men who ought to be upon
their dying beds instead of coughing around Insurance offices. Ha, ha,
ha! Another gentleman, florid of countenance and absolutely without
neck, was quickly checked in the act of giving his name at one of the
desks; one clerk desiring another clerk to look, under the head of "A.,"
in his book, for "_Apoplexy_," and let this man see that we can't take
such a risk as he is on any terms. A third caller, who really looked
quite healthy except around the eyes, was also assured that he need not
call again--"Because, you see," explained the clerkly wag, "it's no go
for you to try to play your BRIGHT'S Disease on _us!_" When, however,
the applicant was a robustious, long-necked, fresh individual, he was
almost lifted from his feet in the rush of obliging young Boreals to
show him into the room of the Medical Examiner; and when, now and then,
an agent, or an insurance-broker, came dragging in, by the collar, some
Safe Risk, just captured, there was an actual contest to see who should
be most polite to the panting but healthy stranger, and obtain his
private biography for the consideration of the Company.

The Reverend OCTAVIUS studied these sprightly little scenes with
unspeakable interest until the arrival of Mr. SCHENCK, and then followed
that popular benefactor into his private office with the air of a man
who had gained a heightened admiration for his species.

"So you have come to your senses at last!" said Mr. SCHENCK, hastily
drawing his visitor toward a window in the side-room to which they had
retired. "Let me look at your tongue, sir."

"What do you mean?" asked the Gospeler, endeavoring to draw back.

"I mean what I say. Let--me--see--your--tongue.--Or, stop!" said Mr.
SCHENCK, seized with a new thought, "I may as well examine your general
organization first." And, flying at the astounded Ritualistic clergyman,
he had sounded his lungs, caused a sharp pain in his liver, and felt his
pulse, before the latter could phrase an intelligent protest.

"You may die at any moment, and probably will," concluded Mr. SCHENCK,
thoughtfully; "but still, on the score of friendship, we'll give you a
Policy for a reasonable amount, and take the chance of being able to
compromise with your mother on a certain per centage after the funeral."

"I don't want any of your plagued policies!" exclaimed the irritated
Gospeler, pushing away the hand striving to feel his pulse again.

"As you have expressed a desire to resign the guardianship of your
wards, Mr. and Miss PENDRAGON, and I have agreed to accept it, my
purpose in calling here is to obtain such statement of your account with
those young people as you may be disposed to render."

"Ah!" returned the other, in sullen disappointment. "That is all, eh?
Allow me to inform you, then, that I have cancelled the Boreal policies
which have been granted to the Murderer and his sister; and allow me
also to remark, that a dying clergyman like yourself might employ his
last moments better than encouraging a Southern destroyer of human
life."

"I do not, cannot believe that MONTGOMERY PENDRAGON is guilty," said Mr.
SIMPSON, firmly. "Having his full confidence, and thoroughly knowing his
nature, I am sure of his innocence, let appearances be what they may.
Consequently, it is my determination to befriend him."

"And you will not have your life insured?"

"I will not, sir. Please stop bothering me."

"And you call yourself a clergyman!" cried Mr. SCHENCK, with intense
scorn. "You pretend to be a Ritualistic spiritual guide; you champion
people who slay the innocent and steal devout men's umbrellas; and yet
you do not scruple to leave your own high-church Mother entirely without
provision at your death.--In such a case," continued the speaker,
rising, while his manner grew ferocious with determination--"in such a
case, all other arguments having failed, my duty is plain. Yon shall not
leave this room, sir, until you have promised to take out a Boreal
Policy."

He started, as he spoke, for the door of the private-office, intending
to lock it and remove the key; but the unhappy Ritualist, fathoming his
design, was there before him, and tore open the door for his own speedy
egress.

"Mr. SCHENCK," observed the Gospeler, turning and pausing in the
doorway, "you allow your business-energy to violate all the most
delicate amenities of private life, and will yet drive some maddened
mortal to such resentful use of pistol, knife, or poker, as your
mourning family shall sincerely deplore. The articles on Free Trade and
Protection in the daily papers have hitherto been regarded as the climax
of all that utterly wearies the long-suffering human soul; but I tell
you, as a candid friend, that they are but little more depressing and
jading to the vital powers than your unceasing mention of
life-insurance."

"These are strong words, sir," answered Mr. SCHENCK, incredulously. "The
editorial articles to which you refer are considered the very drought of
journalism; those by Mr. GREELEY, especially, being so dry that they are
positively dangerous reading without a tumbler of water."

"Yon brought the comparison upon yourself, Mr. SCHENCK. Good day."

Thus speaking, the Reverend OCTAVIUS SIMPSON hurried nervously from the
Boreal temple; not fairly satisfied that he had escaped a Policy until
he found himself safely emerged on Broadway and turning a corner toward
Nassau Street. Beaching the latter bye-way, after a brief interval of
sharp walking, he entered a building nearly opposite that in which was
the office of Mr. DIBBLE; and, having ascended numerous flights of
twilight stairs to the lofty floor immediately over the saddened rooms
occupied by a great American Comic Paper, came into a spidery garret
where lurked MONTGOMERY PENDRAGON,

"Hard at it?" he asked, approaching a ricketty table at which sat the
persecuted Southerner, reading a volume of HOYLE'S Games.

"My only friend!" ejaculated the lonely reader, hurriedly covering the
book with an arm. "I am, as you see, studying law here, all alone with
these silent friends."

He waved his thin hand toward a rude shelf on which were several
well-worn City Directories of remote dates, volumes of Patent Office
Reports for the years '57 and '59, a copy of Mr. GREELEY'S Essays on
Political Economy, an edition of the Corporation Manual, the Coast
Survey for 1850, and other inflaming statistical works, which had been
sent to him in his exile by thoughtful friends who had no place to keep
them.

"Cheer up, brother!" exhorted the good Gospeler, "I'll send you some
nice theological volumes to add to your library, which will then be
complete. Be not despondent. All will come right yet."

"I reckon it will, in time," returned the youth, moodily. "I suppose you
know that my sister is determined to come here and stay with me?"

"Yes, MONTGOMERY, I have heard of her noble resolution. May her
conversation prove sustaining to you."

"There will be enough of it, I reckon, to sustain half a dozen people,"
was the despondent answer. "This is a gloomy place for her, Mr. SIMPSON,
situated, as it is, immediately over the offices of a Comic Paper."

"And do you think she would care for cheerful accessories while you are
in sorrow?" asked the Gospeler, reproachfully.

"But it is so mournful--that floor below," persisted the brother,
doubtfully. "If there were only something the least bit more lively down
there--say an Undertaker's."

"A Sister's Love can lessen the most crushing gloom, MONTGOMERY."

A silent pressure of the hand rewarded this encouraging reminder of
sanguine friendship; and, after the depressed law-student had promised
the Reverend OCTAVIUS to walk with him as far as the ferry in a few
moments, the said Reverend departed for a hasty call upon the old lawyer
across the street.

Benignant Mr. DIBBLE sat near a front window of his office, and received
the visitor with legal serenity.

"And how does our young friend enjoy himself, Mr. SIMPSON, in the
retreat which I had the honor of commending to you for him?"

The visitor replied, that his young friend's retreat, by its very
loftiness, was calculated to inspire any occupant with a room-attic
affection.

"And how, and when, and where did you leave Mr. BUMSTEAD?" inquired Mr.
DIBBLE.

"As well as could be expected; this morning, at Bumsteadville," said the
Gospeler, with answer as terse and comprehensive as the question.

"--Because," added the lawyer, quickly, "there he is, now, coming out of
a refreshment saloon immediately under the building in which our young
friend takes refuge."

"So he is!" exclaimed the surprised Mr. SIMPSON, staring through the
window.

There, indeed, as indicated, was the Ritualistic organist; apparently
eating cloves from the palm of his right hand as he emerged from the
place of refreshment, and wearing a linen coat so long and a straw hat
of such vast brim that his sex was not obvious at first glance. While
the two beholders gazed, in unspeakable fascination, Mr. BUMSTEAD
suddenly made a wild dart at a passing elderly man with a dark
sun-umbrella, ecstatically tore the latter from his grasp, and
passionately tapped him on the head with it. Then, before the astounded
elderly man could recover from his amazement, or regain the gold
spectacles which had been knocked from his nose, the umbrella, after an
instant of keen examination, was restored to him with a humble, almost
abjectly apologetic, air, and Mr. BUMSTEAD hurried back, evidently
crushed, into the refreshment saloon.

"His brain must be turned by the loss of his relative," murmured the
Gospeler, pitifully.

"His umbrellative, you mean," said Mr. DIBBLE.

When these two gentlemen had parted, and the Reverend OCTAVIUS SIMPSON
had been escorted to the ferry, as promised, by MONTGOMERY PENDRAGON,
the latter, after a long, insane walk about the city, with the
thermometer at 98 degrees, returned to his attic in time to surprise a
stranger climbing in through one of the back windows.

"Who are you?" exclaimed the Southern youth, much struck by the funereal
aspect, sexton-like dress, and inordinately long countenance of the
pallid, light-haired intruder.

"Pardon! pardon!" answered he at the window, with much solemnity. "I am
a proprietor of the Comic Paper down below, and am eluding the man who
comes every day to tell me how such a paper _should_ be conducted. He is
now talking to the young man writing the mail-wrappers, who, being of
iron constitution and unmarried, can bear more than I. There was just
time for me to glide out of the window at sound of that fearful voice,
and I climbed the iron shutter and found myself at your casement.--Hark!
Do you hear the buzz down there? He's now telling the young man writing
the mail-wrappers what kind of Cartoons should be got-up for _this_
country.--Hark, again! and the young man writing the mail-wrappers have
clinched and are rolling about the floor.--Hark, once more! The young
man writing the mail-wrappers has put him out."

"Won't you come in?" asked MONTGOMERY, sincerely sorry for the agitated
being.

"Alas, no!" responded the fugitive, in the tone of a cathedral bell.

"I must go back to my lower deep once more. My name is JEREMY BENTHAM; I
am very unhappy in my mind; and, with your permission, will often escape
this way from him who is the bane of my existence."

Being assured of welcome on all occasions, he of the long countenance
went clanging down the iron shutter again; and the lonely law-student,
burying his face in his hands, prayed Providence to forgive him for
having esteemed his own lot so hopelessly gloomy when there were Comic
Paper men on the very next floor.

That night, before going home to Gowanus, the old lawyer across the way
glanced up toward MONTGOMERY'S retreat, and shook his head as though he
couldn't make something out. Whether he had a difficult idea in his
brain, or only a fly on his nose, was for the observer to discover for
himself.

(_To be Continued_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

UNIVERSOCKDOLOGY.

Mr. PUNCHINELLO: It afflicts me, one of your most assiduous readers, to
notice that you cast not even so much as a lack-lustre glance at the
brilliant gems that STEPHEN PEARL ANDREWS scatters periodically through
the columns of the _Evening Mail_ and WOODHULL & CLAFLIN'S _Weekly_. Are
the times out of joint; or is it your Italian nose? Do you fear to quote
the sublimated utterances of the perspicacious, although pleonastic
philosopher? Does he lead you in thought, or the expression thereof?
Then, wherefore? And if not, wherever may the just reason be found for
your indifference?

The science of Universology, as so delightfully unfolded by Mr. ANDREWS,
is one that must ere long overtop and engulf all others, seeing that it
is, of itself, the science which embodies and contains all. It teaches
that the universe exists in time and space--a fact never discovered till
now--or that, rather, it exists in space and time, as the two negative
containers of its _statism_ or existence, and of its _motism_ or
eventuation, (its chain of events.) It shows that statism, or
world-existence-at-rest, in space, is analogous with the cardinal series
of numeration; and motism or world-existence-in-motion, in time,
analogous with the ordinal series of numbers; and that, finally, statism
and cardinism, (as of the four cardinal points in the orientation of
space,) are analogous with spiritualities and the spirit world; and that
motism and ordinism (succession by steps) are analogous with
temporalities, (transitory things) and so with the mundane or transitory
sphere.

Now this is the whole subject in a nutshell--a subject it behooves you
and all other deep thinkers to grapple withal. Through your efforts to
spread the glorious truths thus ingeniously set forth, how much good
might be done! Think of the unravelling of the complications surrounding
the Germano-Gallic war; the light that might be thrown upon the sources
of HORACE GREELEY'S agricultural information; the settlement of the
Coolie question. Then, see what effect a clear and candid discussion of
the topic would have on the public morality, security, and peace! How
often it appears that, in spite of the normal equanimity observable in
circumstantial evidence, hereditary disciplinarisms are totally devoid
of potential abstemiousness. This may be owing to the fact that at ebb
and neap tides the obliquity of vision (duism) remarked by most invalid
veterans in their occasional _adversaria_, is unconscious of their
parental dignity, and by no means to be confounded with the referees in
astronomical or pharmaceutical cases, or with ordinary omphalopsychites.
Whatever be or not be the result of these investigations and
calculations, it is consolatory to the student of proportional
hemispheres to remark that, whichever way the sophist may turn, he
_must_ invariably rely on the softer impeachments of a hireling crowd,
with

    "Water, water, everywhere,
    And not a drop to drink,"

and give up all personal interest in the homogeneous relations arising
from too precipitate a ratiocination of events, urging, at the same
time, the positive proportions exercised in the administration of a not
over particular dormitory, and the replication of
chameleonizing--constantly chameleonizing, odoriferosities.

Yours, PATHIST.

       *       *       *       *       *

About Face!

Recent London advices briefly state that EDMUND ABOUT, the missing
correspondent of the _Soir_, has turned up somewhere. Our Cockney
informant imagines that M. ABOUT, like his distinguished ancestor,
(ABOU, B.A.,) found his "sweet dream of peace" too rudely disturbed by
the howlings of the Prussian dogs of war, and decided to 'ead About for
Paris, simply in order to avoid being 'eaded off by the enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WHEN YOU GO TO LONG BRANCH, DO NOT TAKE A NEWFOUNDLAND
DOG WITH YOU. I BROUGHT ONE DOWN WITH ME HERE, AND WHENEVER I GO OUT TO
TAKE A LITTLE DIP, THE FAITHFUL CREATURE WILL INSIST ON DRAGGING ME
ASHORE."--_Letter from a Friend_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

SUMMER AT SANDY POINT.

_Sandy Point, August 18, 1870_.

PRELIMINARY FLOURISHES.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO:[1] Nature demands a change of air. Man needs rest.
Invigoration is necessary to health. The throbbing brain must shut down
on its throbbing.

Hence second-class hotels, with first-class prices; hence hard beds, no
gas, and many flies. I say--"Hence--flies," but as a general thing I
notice they will not hence.

WHERE TO GO.

Those who are fond of flees may flee to the mountains. I know when I've
got enough, and I prefer to surf it on the sea shore. Take the 3-1/2
A.M. train, and come to

SANDY POINT.

Everything here is sand as far as the eye can reach, or a horse and
wagon, with a profane driver, can travel. The ocean laves the beach. The
sea also is here. The tide comes in twice a day. This alone gives Sandy
Point a great advantage over all other points on the coast.

I rode up in the regular conveyance, and soon after my arrival found
myself standing on the spacious and elegant piazza of

THE CHARNEL HOUSE,

a palatial structure erected by the late Mr. CHARNEL, who is said to
have lavished an immense fortune upon it. Strictly speaking, he didn't
lavish quite so much paint on the front as an advanced civilization had
a right to expect; but within, everything, (including the clerk,)
appears to have been furnished with an eye to

LUXURIOUS COMFORT,

Mr. SOAPINGTON, the genial landlord, Mr. RICHARD SOAPINGTON, Jr., the
gentlemanly clerk, Mrs. SOAPINGTON, the accomplished hostess, and the
lovely Miss CLARA SOAPINGTON, all greeted me with that hearty welcome,
so dear to the traveller. SOAPINGTON said he was glad to see me, and,
seeing that it was me, he would be willing to infringe on his inflexible
rule, and would allow me to pay

CASH IN ADVANCE.

Madame S. was sorry she couldn't set me up a cot in the wash-room, but
would be compelled to let me have a double front-room over the bar. I
told her if the apartment had a practicable trap door I thought I could
get along.

RICHARD S., Jr., was sure he had met me before; and, as a friend, he
would say the establishment was not responsible for valuables unless
deposited in the safe. He would take my watch and jewelry to wear while
I was there, inasmuch as

HE WAS THE SAFE HIMSELF.

The charming Miss S. didn't say anything, but she smiled, and looked
such unutterable things from behind the blinds, that I expect to find it
all in the bill.

Everybody that can get a railroad pass should come to Sandy Point

WHAT TO DO.

Sit in the reading-room and look over the torn files of two daily papers
a week and a half old; or study a hotel advertiser.

THE SURF BATHING

is magnificent. The prevalence of an unmitigated undertow renders it
quite exhilarating for old ladies and invalids. Any one who is drowned
will have every attention paid to his remains,--by the sharks.

BOATING.

Everybody boats. The ROWE Brothers are here, and sing on the water by
moonlight. You can blister your bands at an oar, or bale out the boat,
just as your taste inclines. As the life-preserver is a little out of
repair, I stay on shore.

FISHING.

Everybody fishes. There are all varieties, from speckled trout and
mackerel, up to conger eels, horse mackerel, and porpoises. Parties
frequently come back with all the fishing they want. If absent a week on
a trip, they can make arrangements to have their board run on just the
same.

DRIVING.

Everybody drives. The roads are of unsurpassing loveliness. They drive
every day. If the waiters would drive a few flies out of the
dining-room, we wouldn't sit down quite so many at table.

WHO ARE HERE.

Sandy Point, with all its native attractions, would be nothing were it
not for the beauty and fashion that throng its halls. There are men here
who can draw their note for any amount. Here is an ex-member of
Congress; there a double X brewer, both immensely wealthy. Diamonds
abound. There is a hop in the parlor every evening and preaching on
Sundays.

I should not forget a paralytic washwoman in my section of the house,
who has a prevailing idea, when she brings home my clothes, that eleven
pieces make a dozen.

Reader, if you seek

THE FLUSH OF HEALTH,

come down here! I wasn't very flush when I got here, but I don't intend
to go away till I've put myself into thorough repair.

Yours, SARSFIELD YOUNG.

[Footnote 1: SOAPINGTON, of the hotel here, and I, have been skirmishing
over a board bill for a couple of weeks, and he has finally outflanked
me to the amount of about $40. I think if you will insert this
correspondence it will be all right. S. will succumb.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A War Conundrum.

When are soldiers like writers for the press? When they charge by the
column.

       *       *       *       *       *

A well-tilled Soil.

The article on DICKENS, in the August number of the _Atlantic Monthly_,
is certainly suggestive of fresh Fields, if not of pastures new.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WATERING PLACES.

Punchinello's Vacations.

Sometimes Mr. PUNCHINELLO is very busy. Not only has he upon his
shoulders the ordinary labors of conductor of a great journal, but he
has much to do for other people. His editors, his printers, his binders,
his artists, his engravers, his corps of clerks, his office and errand
boys, and all connected with his extensive establishment, come to him
from time to time for advice in regard to the investment of their
surplus earnings, and between assisting in the purchase of a farm for
this one, a house for the other, and all sorts of stocks and bonds for
the rest, he is often terribly pressed for time.

No one who is not looked up to by a crowd of grateful dependents, all
fattening in the shadow of his prosperity, as it were, can understand
Mr. P's. feelings of responsibility at such times.

Such an unusual demand upon his time occurred last week, and Mr. P.
found that he would not be able to spend a few days as usual at some
fashionable watering place. But be must have some recreation, so he
determined to have a day's fishing among the celebrated Thousand Islands
of the St. Lawrence. He put some luncheon in a basket, and set off quite
early in the morning. Finding that some twenty hours were consumed in
the transit, Mr. P. thought that, considering his hurry, he had better,
perhaps, have gone to Newark for a day's fishing off the piers. But he
was at the St. Lawrence now, and it would not do to complain. He hired a
boat, lines, bait and two navigators, and set out bravely.

He sailed among a crowd of islands where either the bowsprit or the boom
was continually getting caught in the shrubbery and rocks, until he came
to island No. 18. Here was a picnic party.

For reasons which the accompanying view may render obvious, Mr. P. and
his men declined the invitation of the picnickers to stop and join them.
The boat continued on until it reached the channel between islands No.
87 and No. 88, and there Mr. P. got out his lines and commenced to fish,
trolling his bait behind as the boat slowly sailed, under the hot sun,
among those lovely isles, where, to be sure, burning's half o' the
sport, but where "burning SAPPHO" would have lost herself utterly, and
probably have tumbled into some of the watery intricacies and have put
herself out.

Mr. P. did not have much luck at first. He caught one muskallonge, after
a period of patient waiting which he feels he also must call long, and
once, when he thought he was hauling in a fine bass, he turned very red
when the boatmen laughed at seeing him "cotch an eel." But after a while
he got a royal bite. He hauled in manfully, and although, owing to the
intricacies of the channel, he could not see what he had caught, he knew
it was a fine fellow from its weight. At last, after tremendous tugging,
he got it in over the stem.

It was one of the thousand islands!

What could be done now?

The steersman, who had slipped under a seat when he saw the great mass
above him, and the man who managed the sails, were both Canadians, and
after a great deal of excited talk, they agreed if Mr. P. would make it
worth their while, they would endeavor to put the island back in its
place and make no remarks in public which would tend to produce a
misunderstanding between the governments of Great Britain and the United
States, on the ground of undue acquisition of territory. By the payment
of a sum, which it will require a club of thirty subscribers to make
good to him, Mr. P. concluded the arrangement, and they sailed back to
replace the island. But what was the horror of the party, when they
perceived on the unfortunate bit of British territory, a plate, which
had stuck fast by reason of a covering of the juice of plum-pie, and a
fork which was rammed firmly into the earth!

It needed but few collateral evidences to convince Mr. P. and his men
that this was the island where they had seen the picnic.

And where were the picnickers?

If any of Mr. P's. subscribers in Prince EDWARD Island, Costa Rica, the
Gallipagoes, or other outstanding places, receive their paper rather
late this week, they are informed that, in consequence of his having
spent three entire days exploring the labyrinth of these islands in
order to find the bodies of the unfortunate party of pleasure, (which
bodies he did not find,) Mr. P. was very much delayed in his office
business. His near patrons received their papers in due time, but those
at a distance will excuse him, he feels sure, when they consider what
his feelings must have been, while grappling for an entire picnic.

The island was dumped down anywhere, without reference to its former
place. When the Alabama claims are settled, Mr. P. will go back and
adjust it properly.

Mr. P. gained nothing by this trip but the knowledge that there are but
980 of these islands, which an unscrupulous monarchy imposes upon a
credulous people as a full thousand, and the gloom which would naturally
pervade a man, after an occurrence of the kind just narrated.

On his way home, he stopped for supper at Albany, and there he met CYRUS
W. FIELD and Commodore VANDERBILT. One of these gentlemen was looking
very happy and the other very doleful.

(Illustration: The tall gentleman in the picture is Mr. FIELD--not that
he is really so very tall--but he is elevated. The short one is the
Commodore--so drawn, not because he is short, but because he is
depressed.)

After the compliments of the season, (warm ones,) Mr. P. asked his
friends how the war in Europe affected them.

"Gloriously!" cried Mr. FIELD. "Nothing could be better. The messages
fly over our cables like--like--like lightning. Why, sir, I wish they
would keep up the war for ten years."

"And you, sir?" said Mr. P. to the Commodore.

"Oh, I hate it!" said VANDERBILT. "They send neither men nor munitions
by our road. It is an absolute dead loss of hundreds of thousands of
dollars to me that my railroad is on this side of the ocean. I shall
never cease to deplore it."

"But sir," said Mr. P. "the war may cause a great exportation of grain
from the West, and then your road will profit."

"Don't believe it," said the Commodore. "The war will stop exportation."

"It goes against the grain with him, any way you fix it," said Mr.
FIELD, with a festive air. "He can't carry any messages."

"On a cabalistic cable," remarked Mr. P.

CYRUS smiled.

"No, air," said the Commodore, reverting to his grievances. "Never has
such a loss happened to me, since I went into New York Centrals."

"Well, I tell you, VANDY," said Mr. FIELD, "if you and other grasping
creatures had kept away from New York's entrails it would have been much
better for the body corporate of the State."

"Look here!" cried the Commodore, in a rage.

Mr. FIELD looked there, but Mr. P. didn't. He thought it was time to go
for his train, and he went.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEVERAL UNSAVORY RENDERINGS.

Why there should be such a thing as a New York Rendering Company is a
puzzle to thoughtful minds. Persons resident in certain districts of the
city, that border on the North River, though, are cognizant of that
Company. The North River nose knows the Co., and would close itself to
it, only that it is too close upon it to close effectually.

And what are the New York Rendering Company, and to whom do they render,
and what? Lard bless you! sir, or madam, they comprise a thing that
lives, if not by the sweat of its brow, at least by the suet of its
boilers. The dead horses of the city car companies are the creature's
normal food. Nor does it despise smaller venison, for it can batten upon
dead kittens, too, and fatten upon asphyxiated pup. Carnivorous,
decidedly, is the creature concreted by the New York Rendering Company,
converting all that it touches into fat, and so, living literally upon
the fat of the land. That the Company render other things besides fat,
however, has been for some time past a subject of complaint against
their management, and here are a few details of their renderings.

Once the atmosphere of the bays and rivers of New York was a source of
health to the excursionists who, in summer time, seek relaxation by
inexpensive voyages upon the waters adjacent to the city. By casting the
refuse of their carrion into these waters, the New York Rendering
Company have rendered foul and noxious the once healthful atmosphere of
our aquarian outlets, rendering themselves a nuisance, at the same time.

Thus, anything like a "pleasure" excursion by water, in the neighborhood
of New York, has been rendered impossible during the present season, by
the New York Rendering Company.

Off all the shores of our bays Offal has accumulated, and that during
the hottest summer on record for these latitudes. The waters have thus
been rendered unfit for bathing in, as the air has been rendered
pernicious to breathe--another rendering by the New York Rendering
Company, whose manifest mission is to offalize the world.

It is pleasant to know, then, that the renderings of the New York
Rendering Company are likely to be reactionary as well as suicidal,
(perhaps suetcidal might be a better word here,) in their results. Their
"offence is rank," and has reached the nose of authority, for we find it
stated that "Mayor HALL has already made complaint against the New York
Rendering Company, and that they will he indicted at the next sitting of
the Grand Jury."

And when their boiling nuisances come to be seized, as we trust they
will be, how jolly to see them "rendering to Seizer" all that has
rendered them the nuisance they are! Then let them render up the ghost,
and go out spluttering, like a dip candle from one of their own rancid
renderings--and so an end of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CARD OF THANKS.

PUNCHINELLO is extremely indebted to _The Sun_ for the association of
the names of several worthy gentlemen with the ownership of the only
first-class Illustrated Humorous and Satirical paper published in
America: (Subscription price, for one year, $4.00. Single copies 10
cents. Office, 83 Nassau St., New York.)

Well, it is something to be credited with having decent men about you;
perhaps if _The Sun_ would try the experiment it would be found more
purifying than even the sermons of O. DYER.

       *       *       *       *       *

WHY IT IS SO DRY.

We _thought_ it had something to do with a lack of moisture in the air;
and now, along comes Monsieur PROU, another philosopher, and merely says
what we had thought. He declares that there was so much ice last winter
(come now, gentlemen of the Ice Companies, what have you to say to
that?) it couldn't melt in time to evaporate in time to supply moisture
in time for the necessary showers. (Somehow, there's an eternity of
"time" in that sentence; but _n'importe: allons!_) We think PROU has
proved his case. And, although we can't quite sympathise with his
suggestion that detachments of sappers and miners be employed in the
spring-time, in Arctic (and doubtless also Antarctic) regions, in
blowing up icebergs and otherwise facilitating the operations of old
Sol, we give the ingenious Frenchman credit for at least as much
philosophic acumen as we ourselves possess: and Heaven only knows how
superb a compliment we thus convey!

Couldn't our friend Capt. HALL be requested to watch the Pole a little
next winter, and look into this idea of ours and PROU'S?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: CIRCUMSTANCES WILL COMPEL THE STATELIEST OF MEN TO STOOP,
SOMETIMES. GETTING A LIGHT FROM THE STUMP OF A NEWSBOY'S CIGAR IS ONE OF
THEM.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A SCENE FROM OLD NICK-OLOS NICK-OLBY.

THE EMPEROR DE MANTALINI GOING TO THE "DEMNITION BOW-WOWS."]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR POLICE REPORT.

On Tuesday last a suspicious looking man was arrested by the police, and
taken to the One Hundred and Fourth Precinct Station House, on several
charges of disorderly acts perpetrated by him in various parts of the
city. He gave his name as CHARLES A. DANA, and was locked up for the
night.

Yesterday morning, prisoner was brought before Justice DOWNY, at the
Jephson Market Police Court.

Officer LOCUST, being called to testify, stated that his attention was
directed to the prisoner, on Tuesday afternoon last, by some boys in
Fourteenth Street. Prisoner was standing on the side-walk, on the side
of the street opposite Tammany Hall. He was armed with a small pewter
squirt, with which he was trying to smear the front of that building by
drawing up dirty water from the gutter. The range of the squirt did not
appear to reach more than half-way across the street. The water used was
very foul, leaving stains upon a dirt-cart that was passing. While
witness was watching the prisoner, the Hon. WM. M. TWEED came down the
steps from Tammany Hall, and, upon seeing him, prisoner ran away, but
was seized by witness, before he could make his escape.

On being interrogated by the magistrate, prisoner said that he hardly
knew what he was doing when arrested. The _Sun_ was in his eyes at the
time. If it hadn't been so, he would not have missed his shot. He must
do something for a living, and he thought that throwing dirty water was
as good an occupation as any other. Had made money out of it by
threatening respectable people with his pewter squirt, and they would
give him money rather than have their clothes soiled. He would do
anything to make money; and he didn't in the least mind dirtying his
hands in the making of it.

To a question by the magistrate, as to whether he had had anything to do
with casting offal into the bay, prisoner laughed in a wild manner, and
said that he, for one, could never be accused of wasting good, honest
dirt in that way. All the offal in the world, said prisoner, wasn't too
much for him to use in bespattering the objects of his attention,
friends as well as foes. He had heaved tons of offal, already, at Mr. A.
OAKEY HALL, (whom he evidently imagined to be an Irishman, and called
O'HALL,) He didn't care whom he hit, in fact, so long as he could make
it pay.

A gentleman connected with the velocipede interest, whose name our
reporter did not catch, here stated that he became acquainted with
prisoner nearly two years ago, while the velocipede frenzy was at its
height. He had constructed to order for the prisoner a peculiar
velocipede called the _"Sun Squirt."_ It had a Dyer's tub attached to
it, which was filled with bilge-water. On this machine, the prisoner,
armed with a pewter squirt, used to practise for several hours a day,
careering rapidly around the rink, and taking flying shots, as he went,
at large posters attached to the wall, having portraits on them of
General GRANT, Hon. H. GREELEY, Hon. WM. M. TWEED, The Mayor, Governor
HOFFMAN, and several other citizens of admitted position and
respectability. The bilge-water usually came back upon him, however, and
he was generally a humiliating object on leaving the rink.

Prisoner, on being asked by the magistrate whether he had any references
respecting character to give, replied in the negative, whereupon orders
were issued to lock him up, pending the appearance of Mr. PUNCHINELLO,
who will have some statements to make about him at a future day.

A reward of $5,000 has been offered for any information about the pewter
squirt, and particularly as to when, and by whom it was made; and, as
detectives are now engaged in working up the case, there can be but
little doubt that the vile instrument will ere long be identified.

       *       *       *       *       *

DISTRESSING.

Some awful smasher of cherished notions is trying to make out that
ROUGET DE LISLE was not the real author of the famous _Marseillaise_,
but that he stole it from the Germans. It pains us to contemplate the
possibility of the charge being true, but, should it prove to be so, we
suggest that the name of the accepted author be changed from ROUGET to
ROGUEY DE LISLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WHAT WILL HE DO WITH IT?"

_Servant._ "MASSA FENTON AND MASSA CONKLIN HAVE SENT DIS YERE FOUNDLIN'
TO YER, TO TOOK KEER OF FOR A FEW WEEKS."

_Matron Greeley._ "O: DEAR, DEAR! AND IF IT SHOULD DIE ON MY HANDS,
WHO'S TO PAY THE FUNERAL EXPENSES?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN AMONG THE FAT MEN.

The "Last Gustive" attends the Annual Clam-Bake.

Empires may totter and Dienastys pass in their checks.

Politicians may steal the Goddess of Liberty poorer than JOB'S old
Maskaline Gobbler.

J. FISK, Jr., may set the heel of his bute down onto the neck of Rail
Rodes--Steambotes--ballet gals, and all that sort o' thing, and this
mundane speer will jog along, as slick as a pin, and no questions asked.

But deprive a Fat man of his little clam-bake, and it would be full as
pleasant as settin' down onto a Hornet's nest, when the Hornet family
were all to home.

That's so.

Another cargo of clams has gone to that born whence no clam returns,
onless you ram your finger down your throte, or take an Emetick.

In the words of Commodore PERRY, who is, alas! no more.

"The misfortenit bivalves meet the Fat man, and they're his'n."

Altho' I'me not much on the fat order myself, I received an invitation
to attend the grate Clam-bake. Mrs. GREEN put me up a lunch to eat on
the cars, and robin' myself in a cleen biled shirt, I sholdered my
umbreller and left Skeensboro.

The seen at Union Park was sublime with plenty of Ham fat. If all flesh
is grass, thought I, when old _tempus fugit_ comes along with his mowin'
masheen to cut this crop of fat men, I reckon he will have to hire some
of his nabor's barns, to help hold all of his hay.

Great mountins of hooman flesh were bobbin' about like kernals of corn
on a red hot stove, remindin' me of a corn field full of punkins set up
on clothes pins.

The little heads on top of the great sweating bodies, looked as if they
were sleev buttons drove in the top of the Punkins.

When a fat man laffs, his little head sinks down into his shirt collar,
and disappears in the fat, like a turtle's head when you tickle his nose
with a sharp stick.

And then to see them eat clams. I've seen men punish clams by the
bushel--by the barrel--but never did I see men shovel clams in by the
cart load before.

"Gee-whitaker," said I, to a Reporter of a N.Y. Journal, "them critters
must have a dredful elastic stomack."

"Yes," said he, "when Fat-men get clam hungry, the sea banks has to give
up her clams, and the grocery keepers furnish the seasonin'."

"Wall," said I, "if the Sea has many such runs on her clam-banks as
this, she will have to put on her shutters soon, and go into
lickerdation."

"In which state," said he laffin', "it would be exceedin'ly
_clam_-etous."

The members of the Fat Men's Club all went prepared for hot weather,
dressed in a linnen soot and carryin' palm leaf fans.

I also notised large fassits onto the toes of their butes, so as to let
out the grease occasionly, and keep there butes from sloppin' over.

President RANSOM told me, that a fat man's wife invented the fassets, so
as to save sope grease.

"One fat man in hot weather," said Mister RANSOM, "will furnish grease
enuff, in the summer time, to keep his family in soft sope the year
around, besides supplyin' two or three daily papers with a lot."

Between you and me, Friend PUNCHINELLO, that greasy yarn seems rather
too slipperry to swaller, but I guess it'll wash after all.

PETER REED, of New York, and Docter WHITBECK, of West Troy, danced the
hiland fling for the championship and a barrel of clams.

"While PETE was cuttin' a pigin wing, and the Dr. was rakin' down a
dubble shuffle, they made things rattle, and naborin' towns thought it
was an airthquake, and began movin' out their feather beds.

"Go it, my fat friends," said I, to encourage 'em, "blood will tell, and
exercise help to digest your clams."

They shook their feet ontil exhausted natur, from necessity, ceased to
be virtous, when suddenly they both tumbled over onto their backs, and
blowed like porpoises.

The weather bein' hot, a shovel full of cloride of lime was sprinkled
onter them, to keep them from gettin' fly blode.

I was introjuced to a North River steembote pilot, whose corporosity
looked like the Commissary department of a Prushion Regiment.

"How are you, Paunchy Pilate," said I, gettin' off a joak at his
expense. "How many clams have you crucifide to-day?"

"Bully for you, ole man. Haw! haw! he! he! ho! ho!" roared half a dozen
fat men at my faceshusness, and they laffed and shook their sides, ontil
I thought they'd colaps a floo and spatter me.

One of them fat men approched me, and invited me to have a game of leep
frog.

"Excuse me, Captin," said I, "when I get so I can sholder an elefant,
I'le come around and accomodate you."

Some was playin' tag. Some was playin' blindman's-buff, while all was
amusin' themselves, at some innocent pastime or other.

The day's performance was closed by chasin' a greased pig.

The hog was well greased and let loose, and the whole lot of fat men
started pell-mell.

It was "Root hog, or die" with the odds in favor of the Hog.

All of a sudden, the hog turned back, and the fat men coulden't stop,
when down they all fell on top of poor piggy, smashin' him flatter'n a
pancake.

The bystanders were startin' for derricks and jack-screws to raise the
fat men off from each other.

"Hold on," says I, "I know a trick worth 2 of that."

I rusht into the house, and ceasin' the dinner-bell, rung it as hard as
I could.

It delited me, in my old age, to see them chaps scrabble when they heard
that bell.

In 10 seconds time, only one member of the pile diden't git up, and
rise, and that was the hog.

It was a cruel deception--but I believe the mean trick justifide the
end, and saved the Bord of Helth a big bill of expense. For sure's
you're borned, it would have been a meesely old job, cartin' of that big
pile of corrupshun.

I had seen enuff for one day.

My fisikle and intelectooal capacity was gorged.

Foldin' my Filacteries, and pickin' up my bloo cotton parashoot, I fled
the seen, hily tickled to think I wasen't a fat man.

Virtously of thee,

HIRAM GREEN, Esq.,

_Lait Gustise of the Peece._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: WOMAN ASSERTS HER RIGHTS]

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR FINANCIAL ARTICLE.

WALL STREET, August 9th, 1870.

SIR:--It is with feelings of indignation and scorn that I proceed once
more to pollute my pen with the chronicles of a mercenary rabble. It
_had_ been thought that the remonstrances of the pure and high-minded
among your readers would have sufficed to overcome the resolution of an
infatuated, but not Criminal Editor. There was a time when the claims of
a _Certain Contributor_ were wont to be considered. But the passion for
worldly greed has, alas! perverted a too simple nature, and where the
Muses once found a congenial resting place, the demon Mammon now sits in
GHASTLY TRIUMPH.

I will not here refer to my threat of resignation, nor to the shouts of
diabolical laughter with which it was received by the conductor of a
Comic Journal, whose name it would not become me to mention. Suffice it
to say that those sentiments of loyalty and affection which have ever
been my glory, and a keen appreciation of the difficulty of obtaining
employment on the Press, have kept me attached to the staff of
PUNCHINELLO. The anguish which Finance has cost an artistic soul no one
may ever know. The silent tear may fall, but it shall be buried in my
bosom. The spectacle of my hidden suffering shall stand as a reproach to
one whom I once HONORED and now PITY.

Divesting myself of that part of my nature which is comprised in the
good, the beautiful and true, I betook myself yesterday to Wall Street
and the Gold Room. At the portals of the Financial Menagerie, a
gentleman placed his hand upon my shoulder.

Was I a subscriber?

No, but I was a comic writer.

He said I looked as though I had seen misfortune. If I was not a
subscriber, perhaps I had been in the Penitentiary, served out a
sentence at Sing Sing, or procured a divorce from my wife?

I had done none of these things.

I was not a member of the Legislature?

No.

A brilliant idea struck him. Perhaps I had been an editor?

I pleaded guilty.

He thought that would do--I might go in.

I went in, and herewith submit to you the result of my investigations.

NINE O'CLOCK.--On opening this morning, a scarcity of money was
perceptible in the market. It was especially perceptible in the case of
your contributor. (This is _not_ a hint that a week's salary in advance
would be acceptable.) Peanuts are much sought after. (They are excellent
things to pelt a fellow with.) Apples were inquired after, but upon a
rumor that they were unripe, they declined several per cent.

HALF PAST NINE.--The following telegram has just been received here.

"METZ, August 11th.

_"To His Serene Highness, the Prince of Erie, Duke of the Grand Opera
House, Admiral of Narragansett, Commander of the Ninth, etc., etc.,
etc., Erie Palace, New York City._

"ROYAL BROTHER:--Louis has received his baptism of fire. McMAHON wept.
He is training to dispute with Miss LOUISA MOORE, the proud title of the
'Champion Weepist.'

"Send me the Ninth, and the flower of _Opera Bouffe_--aye, even the
great SCHNEIDER--shall be thine. 'Tis France that calls--be kind.
Fraternally thine own,

NAP."

It was at first thought that H.S.H. would accede to the Emperor's
request, his recent treaty with the Court of the _Grande Duchesse_ and
his diplomatic relations with the Viennoise Ballet Troupe having
rendered the event far from improbable. It was also considered that the
hostility which he has openly displayed towards the British Erie
Protection Committee would predispose him in favor of England's natural
enemy. In view of the possible departure of the Ninth, and the
consequent prolongation of the European war, gold rose several degrees
above freezing point.

TEN O'CLOCK.--The Ninth, don't go to Europe after all. Several members
of Company "K" were observed to shed tears of vexation--or joy! Here is
Col. FISK'S reply.

"To NAPOLEON, _(not in Berlin.)_"

"EFFETE MONARCH:--Can't spare the b-hoys at any price. They're going
into camp down at the 'Branch.' Besides, some of them haven't paid for
their uniforms yet. With regards to Eugenie,"

"I am Right Royally Yours,"

JAS. FISK, JR.

"P.S.--If a large diamond, a team of six black and white horses, a
Sound steamer, or a copy of the _Tribune_, would be of any use to you,
command me. I might also spare you GOULD and some of my relations in
case you were very short of men, and had _some very perilous positions_
to fill up. JAMES."

HALF PAST TEN.--Speculators in New York Central and Hudson River
securities are much excited over a report that Commodore VANDERBILT had
been seen to purchase a watering hose in the store of a well known
manufacturer of gardening implements, on Broadway. He wrapped it in
brown paper, placed it in his $1000 buggy, and drove away behind Dexter
at the rate of 0:01-1/4 per minute. I have it on good authority that
there is no truth in the rumor, circulated a few days ago, that the
Commodore was engaged in negotiation with the Paid Fire Department for
the use of their engines, etc., on some occasion not far distant.

ELEVEN O'CLOCK.--It is now officially announced that the watering hose
referred to in my last is intended for gardening purposes only.

HALF PAST ELEVEN.--Great war between Erie and the _Tribune_. _Tribune_
interdicted on Erie Railway and Boston and Long Branch steamers.
Desolation of the Hub in consequence. Panic amongst _Tribune_
stockholders.

TWELVE.--FISK says that the _Tribune_ is so _heavy_ that it _must_ far
the future be paid for by _weight_, on his steamers. It is felt that
this course, if adopted by Mr. GREELEY, would be financially ruinous to
the interests of his paper.

HALF PAST TWELVE.--It is stated here that Mr. GREELEY, in the effectual
disguise of a bran new hat and respectable boots, succeeded in smuggling
a carpet bag filled with _Tribunes_ on board the _Plymouth Rock_. Much
anxiety is felt here concerning his fate, in case the Admiral should
discover his presence on board.

ONE O'CLOCK.--In a letter just received, Mr. GREELEY designates the
above report as "a lie--a lie--false and malicious, and uttered with
intent to malign and defame." I publish Mr. G's correction with
pleasure.

HALT PAST ONE.--For some days past a steady decline has been noticeable
in Government securities; a want of confidence in the Executive is said
to be the cause. It is reported that several of our leading financiers
have openly indicated their dissatisfaction with the policy of those in
power at Washington.

Two O'CLOCK.--The leading financier referred to in my last I find to be
JAMES FISK, JR.

HALF PAST TWO.--He indicated his dissatisfaction with the policy of the
Government, to the President at Long Branch, thus: Having transferred
all the jewels from his left hand to the right, and carefully adjusted
them there, he raised the hand in question to his finely cut Roman nose,
then, extending his fingers, he twirled them for several minutes without
exhibiting any symptoms of fatigue. GRANT is said to have allowed a
prime Partaga to drop from between his lips in his surprise.

THREE O'CLOCK.--It is now rumored that Fisk did not apply his fingers in
the manner stated.

HALF PAST FOUR.--Market (at Delmonico's) gone frantic over a consignment
of _Opera Bouffe_ sent by the Erie Protection Committee as a mark of
confidence in the present Erie management. Eries said to be in good
voice. Preferred stock will open in about a month with an extensive and
carefully selected ballet. _Premieres Danseuses_ (hic) strong, with
extensive sales. Scenery (hic) quiet, (hic.) Appointments active (hic.)

GREENBAGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Influence of Association.

Reading on one of the bulletin boards, the other day, the words "War to
the Last!" we were irresistibly reminded of the difficulty that lately
existed between the native and Chinese Crispins in Massachusetts.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE WAY TO BECOME GREAT.

Half-witted people, only, will suppose I mean _grate_, for the most
obtuse nincompoop must know that anybody can become a grate man by going
into the stove business; but to develop yourself into a real _bona-fide_
great man, like GEORGE FRANCIS TRAIN or DANIEL PRATT, requires much
study and a persistent effort. I have carefully thought out this
subject, and have reduced my reflections and observations to a series of
rules, which, for the benefit of humanity, I propose to make public.

It must he premised that there are many varieties of great men. Daddy
LAMBERT was a great man, so was the living skeleton, yet even a casual
observer could perceive the difference in their greatness. The greatness
of the fleshy world is one thing; the greatness of the no-fleshy world
is another. Also, strange as it may seem, a man may be great and yet not
be great. HOOD was a great General, so was NAP 3, but they tell me that
Nashville and Saarbrucken are terrible commentaries on greatness. Also a
man may be great and not know it. They say that, until he had made his
grand success at Fort Fisher, you never could persuade BUTLER that he
was a great General. TUPPER, I am informed, would never believe that he
was the most remarkable poet ever produced by England. Also a man may be
great and be perfectly aware of it. Acquaintances of GEORGE FRANCIS
TRAIN, Gen. O'NEILL, and Count JOANNES, assert that no one knows, better
than these gentlemen, that they are great men. Also a man may die calmly
in the consciousness that he is a distinguished individual, and yet,
years afterwards, some magazine writer may cast historic doubts upon his
greatness.

Of course there are several classes of great people. There is the little
great man, (for example, NAP. 3,) the big great man, (BISMARCK,) the
great little man, (NAP. 1,) and the great big man, (the Onondaga giant.)
But the patient observer must perceive that general rules will cover all
these cases.

It is to be hoped that no one, who shall become great by means of my
rules, will turn upon me and revile me, when he finds himself
interviewed incessantly, persecuted by unearthings of his early sins, by
persistent beggars, by slanders of the envious, by libels of the press,
and by the other concomitants of greatness. You must take the sour with
the sweet. Even the sweetest orange may have an unpleasant rind.

RULES BY WHICH EVERY MAN CAN BECOME GREAT.

1. Always be sure to get what belongs to you, and make most vigorous
grabs for everything that belongs to everybody else.

2. Take everything which is offered to you, if it be on a par with what
you deem the standard of your worth.

This rule requires the exercise of much wisdom in its application. If,
for example, you look upon the Custom House as the office which is
adapted to you, don't, under any circumstances, take the appraiser's
position. But you must never let the rule work the other way.

3. Always have a policy. Talk about it much and often, and be sure to
call it "my policy."

The best of rules being liable to misconstruction, some Congressmen have
acted as if this rule read, "Always have a policy shop."

4. Always have a theory. If a murder has been committed, appear to know
all about the "dog," and to be familiar with its history from the time
when it was a pup. Be sure to fix suspicion upon some person, even if
you are compelled to eat your own words on the following day.

5. Talk much and often about protection, and give advice to farmers,
even if you don't know anything about agriculture.

6. Fill your head with classical quotations, and trot them out on all
occasions, whether discussing a bill for the diffusion of beans among
the Indians, or the Alabama claims.

7. Smoke many costly Havana cigars.

This rule has been lately discovered.

8. Get some one to write a history of CAESAR for you, or an account of a
tour in the Highlands, and then claim the work as your own.

There are one or two observations I would here make, which may be
useful. If you are ambitious, you had better commence at the lower
rounds of the ladder, in order that your ascent may be safe and rapid.
If you would be, for instance, a great statesman, be first an alderman;
if a great warrior, be first--well, say a tanner. Also, you should pay
particular attention to the clothes which you inhabit. An old white hat
and a slouchy old overcoat will insure you a nomination for the office
of Governor.

If, by following these rules and heeding these observations, you cannot
become a great man, you may rest assured that the fault is not in the
rules, but in you. What is already perfect cannot be made more perfect.
If you fail, after conscientiously following the above advice, (though
I'm not sure that the fact will not be the same, if you succeed,) it's
because you are already great--a great fool.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE COLORED TROOPS FOUGHT NOBLY."

So far as the Franco-Prussian war has gone, the blackest page of its
history appears to be the employment of the Turcos, who are nearly as
black as average Nubian "niggers." The expedient of mixing black troops
with white was not very successful during our own little war. Raids upon
hen-roosts were about the most prominent results of the experiment,
though said raids were magnified by the Rads into grand victories over
Confeds. The Turcos have done better, so far as mere fighting is
concerned; but their brutal outrages exceed so greatly the hen-roost
exploits of WENDELL PHILLIPS'S devoted darkies, that they are certainly
entitled to be organized into battalions bearing the title of the
NAPOLEON Black Guards.

       *       *       *       *       *

"THE VOICE OF THE TURTLE."

According to a newspaper paragraph, turtles are growing used to being
canned alive, now, on the Pacific Coast. On hearing of this atrocity,
the Nine Muses repaired at once to the office of PUNCHINELLO, and here
is the result of their visit:

     'Tis the voice of the Turtle
       That's heard in the land.
     Crying, "Bother your care!
       I don't want to be canned!

     "Pack me whole in a tub,
       Nor be stingy of ice,
     What I want is a BERGH,
       Nothing less will suffice."

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

_Black-eyed Susan_ asks us whether a Pitched battle can take place on
land.
_Answer._--Certainly not. When we speak of a battle being Pitched we
mean that it has been fought by Tars.

_Fogbank._--"Is DANA, of _The Sun_, any relation to "Truthful JAMES," of
whom the _Overland Monthy_ has written?"
_Answer._--Distantly related, through intermarriage with the LONGBOWS.

_Moses._--We do not suppose that the person referred to by you as a
Dyer and Scourer is in any way related to OLIVER DYER, although the
latter person scoured Water Street some time since, and very
effectually, in pursuit of a "sensation." The word "Scourer,"
nevertheless, might be an allowable corruption of "Esquire," when
applied to any of the proprietors of that mephitic daily, _The Sun_.

_Pickerel._--Will Mr. GREELEY be obliged to dress in court costume if he
accepts the mission to the Court of St. JAMES?
_Answer._--No. It would be contrary to Mr. GREELEY'S well-known
principles to get on "tights."

_Flagroot._--Is it correct to say the "balance" of an army, meaning the
rest of it?
_Answer._--Not always. When an army has turned the Scale of battle,
however, the word Balance may be used.

_Mary Jane._--I have embroidered a flag for the Prussian army, and am at
a loss for a motto. How would "Bear and Forbear" do?
_Answer._--"Beer and for Beer" would be better.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "THERE!--I SHOULD LIKE TO SEE THE UNDERTOW THAT WOULD RUN
AWAY WITH ME!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

A ROAR FROM NIAGARA.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO:--Having been reminded, by your recent notes on
Niagara, that there is a cataract of that name, possessed of height and
depth and breadth and volume and other well-known characteristics of a
genuine Waterfall, I thought I would go and see it for myself. Not that
I doubted your statements--which, indeed, are handsomely supported by
familiar statistics,--but certainly there is a charm in treading the
ground once trod by Greatness, breathing--well not the same air, I hope,
but some of the same kind,--viewing the identical scenes, and being
swindled by the self-same parties, that had just occasioned your
animated comments.

I don't know a charm at all comparable with that of being swindled in
the midst of fine scenery, when the funds and enthusiasm still hold out,
and the sense of actually getting the worth of one's money is not yet so
blunted by transactions calculated to awaken Thought, as to have lost
the power of increasing one's felicity. That the intelligent lad who
drove me was in league with every one of the parties who were stationed
here and there with the sole apparent purpose of receiving fifty cents
from visitors, I was loth to believe, though nothing could have been
plainer, if one had happened to think of it from the start.

Is it not funny, the way they serve their Congress Water at the Cataract
House? They put a big lump of ice in a tumbler, take a bottle from a
shelf, pour the warm, stale fluid, (tasting like _perspiration_, as one
might fancy,) into this glass, and expect you to wait till it has grown
cool enough to be palatable. Well, if you wait, you lose what little
life there is left in the stuff; and if you don't, you'll be sorry you
hadn't done so.

One may say, "You needn't have ordered any Congress Water." Very well,
but why not, provided I liked it? The clerk said they kept Vichy, also,
but I learned they were "out." I wish they had been out of Congress too.
"All right!" said I, "I shall enjoy my breakfast all the more, for I
know _that_ will make amends!" And it did. The "salmon trout" was dry,
as usual, but that breakfast was a good thing. I enjoyed it, and my two
niggers and my New York paper of day before, (for which I paid a cute
looking boy in the hall ten cents, on my way to breakfast,) and was
happy.

Not, my dear P., till I reached the "other side," and had been inveigled
into the Museum Hotel, and persuaded into those vile wrappings of
oil-cloth, with the ponderous rubbers over my thick boots, and had stood
around for some time, awaiting the pleasure of the very leisurely guide,
sweating at every pore, (or _nearly_ every one, for there are several
millions, I believe, and I so hate exaggeration,) and trying to evade
the glances of the amused bystanders, did I begin to realize the
enormity of the imposition that had been practised on me. Just fancy
_yourself_, Mr PUNCHINELLO, in such a costume, taking a seemingly
interminable walk in a hot sun, down ever so many steps, encased in
those nasty articles of gear, in the company of several other helpless
unfortunates, wishing with all your might yon were already there!"

"But the grandeur and glory of the adventure will console me!" I
murmured. Grandeur be hanged! A fig for the "glory!" What! do you call
this "going under the Falls,"--that renowned journey, so full of peril?
Pooh! merely standing in a bath-tub and letting somebody pull the
string! You don't get quite so wet; that's all. Where's the "danger,"
where's the "glory," of merely stepping under a little spirt from one
end of the Falls, with plenty of room to stand, and no darkness, no
mystery, no nothing. Nothing but an overwhelming sense of being a cussed
fool, and a simpleton, and a stupid, _and_ a dunce!

Oh, the going back, after that! in the same loathed costume, inwardly
justifying the laughter of the knowing loungers as you ascend among
them, and cursing yourself as the chief among ten thousand
(ninnies,)--the one altogether idiotic.

Except for this enormous swindle, dear P., I should have enjoyed
Niagara, and Niagara would doubtless have enjoyed me. But this
preposterous, disgusting, outrageous, ridiculous, contemptible,
disgraceful, _unsurpassable_ swindle prevented anything like a mutual
understanding. I saw green in the Falls, the Falls saw green in me. The
Falls kept coming down; I had already come down, (with my dollars,) and,
in fact, was perpetually descending, with sums varying from twenty-five
cents to four dollars and a half.

My sole object, friend PUNCHINELLO, in addressing you on this subject,
is to beg and beseech that you will warn the too-credulous and
too-generous public against this unmatchably atrocious swindle of Going
Under the Falls. It is too much for proud Humanity, Mr. P.! It is
crushing! It is withering! It is annihilating! What! "Annex" this fraud?
Never!--NEVER!

TUPMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE POSSIBLE "WHY?" OF IT.

The personal feeling against the French Emperor, so often displayed in
the columns of the _Tribune_, has frequently been a subject of comment.
Nevertheless it is easily accounted for. As Louis NAPOLEON is said to
detest _ham_, ever since he was incarcerated in the fortress of that
name, so does the Hon. HORACE GREELEY detest _him_, ever since he (H.
G.) was arrested in France for some offence, real or imaginary, which we
cannot now recall to mind, and thrown into prison at Clichy. And to
this, also, may be traced the celebrated _bon mot of_ Mr. GREELEY, who
once remarked, on a festive occasion, that "Ham was afflicted with
_trichinosis_ when it had Louis NAPOLEON in it."

       *       *       *       *       *

A HINT FOR EXCURSIONISTS.

On account of the present nauseating condition of New York Bay, owing to
the offal nuisance, no prudent voyager should seek to stem its feculent
tide unless provided with "something to take." An intelligent
correspondent suggests that brandy would be about the thing, but that it
should be labelled "Bay Bum."

       *       *       *       *       *

A Military Opinion.

The "Prussian centre," of which we hear so much just now, ought to be
permanently established at Cologne, which place has been, in feet, the
Scenter of the world for generations past.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOOK NOTICE.

LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. By E. SHELTON MACKENZIE, LL.D,, Philadelphia:
T. B. PETERSON AND BROTHERS.

In this volume of 484 pages, Dr. MACKENZIE brings before his readers a
very full and interesting compilation of facts relating to the career of
the great novelist. Besides these, the volume contains a number of
characteristic articles from the pen of DICKENS, published, originally,
in _All the Year Round_, some of which are of recent date. The book is
embellished with a portrait and autograph of DICKENS.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                   Extraordinary Bargains.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |    Respectfully call the attention of their Customers and    |
  |             Strangers to their attractive Stock              |
  |                                                              |
  |                              OF                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                       SUMMER AND FALL                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                         DRESS SILKS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                      At popular prices.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Striped, Checked and Chine                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                            SILKS,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |             In great variety, $1 to $2 per yard;             |
  |                      value $1.50 to $3                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PLAIN FOULARD,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                  $1.50, value $2 per yard.                   |
  |                   24 inch Black and White                    |
  |                 Striped $1.75; value $2.50.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       STRIPED SATINS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                       $1.25; value $2.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Plain and Striped Japanese,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    75c. and $1 per yard.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Rich White and Colored Dress Satins,             |
  |                                                              |
  |                        Extra Quality.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A CHOICE LINE OF                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PLAIN GRAINS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |             for Evening and Street, $2.50 to $3;             |
  |                 value $3 to $3.50 per yard.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A FEW EXTRA RICH                       |
  |                                                              |
  |             SATIN BROCADE SILKS, AMERICAN SILKS,             |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Black and Colored, $2.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                  JOB LOT OF MEDIUM AND RICH                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                            SILKS.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                       GREAT BARGAINS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A COMPLETE STOCK                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                         BLACK SILKS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                      At popular prices.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      PLAIN AND STRIPED                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      GAZE DE CHAMBREY,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |             Alexandre Best Kid Gloves, &c., &c.              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Streets.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Are offering several lots of                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                      HOUSEKEEPING GOODS                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                          MUCH BELOW                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                     COST OF IMPORTATION.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             5-8 and 3-4 Single and Double DAMASK             |
  |              NAPKINS, from $1 to $3.50 per doz.              |
  |                                                              |
  |             DAMASK TABLE CLOTHS, all sizes, from             |
  |                     $1.50 to $2.75 each.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Brown and Bleached TABLE DAMASK, all             |
  |               linen, from 40 to 75c. per yard.               |
  |                                                              |
  |             LINEN SHEETING, from 60 to 90c. per              |
  |                            yard.                             |
  |                                                              |
  |           PILLOW LINENS, from 30 to 70c. per yard            |
  |                                                              |
  |          LINEN SHEETS, for Single and Double Beds,           |
  |                     at $2.5O and upward.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Fringed HUCKABACK TOWELS, $1                 |
  |                     per doz. and upward.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |              Bleached HUCKABACK TOWELS, 12 1-2               |
  |                     per yard and upward.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |           Excellent Kitchen Towelling. In 25 yard            |
  |                   pieces, $3.25 per piece.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |             Several Hundred pieces Linen Nursery             |
  |           Diapers, various widths, at $1 per piece           |
  |                    below Current prices.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          MARSEILLES                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                     QUILTS AND BLANKETS,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                        AT LOW PRICES.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |       Attention of House and Hotel Keepers is invited        |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                4TH AVE., 9TH AND 10TH STREETS                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                          PUNCHINELLO.                        |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical  |
  | Weekly Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The     |
  | Press and the Public in every State and Territory of the     |
  | Union endorse it as the best paper of the kind ever          |
  | published in America.                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL.                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Subscription for one year, (with $2.00 premium,)      $4.00  |
  | "           "  six months, (without premium,)          2.00  |
  | "           "  three months, "         "               1.00  |
  | Single copies mailed free, for                          .10  |
  |                                                              |
  | We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S   |
  | CHROMOS for subscriptions as follows:                        |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year, and                            |
  |                                                              |
  | "The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo.         |
  | Size 8-3/8 by 11-1/8 ($2.00 picture,)--for            $4.00  |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $3.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | Wild Roses. 12-1/8 x 9.                                      |
  | Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.                                   |
  | Easter Morning. 6-3/4 x 10-1/4--for                   $5.00  |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $5.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | Group of Chickens;                                           |
  | Group of Ducklings;                                          |
  | Group of Quails. Each 10 x 12-1/8.                           |
  | The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14.                               |
  | The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.               |
  | Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12--for  $6.50 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $6.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | The Baby in Trouble; The Unconscious Sleeper; The Two        |
  | Friends. (Dog and Child.) Each 13 x 16-3/4.                  |
  | Spring; Summer: Autumn; 12-7/8 x 16-1/8.                     |
  | The Kid's Play Ground. ll x 17-1/2--for                $7.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $7.50 chromos                                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Strawberries and Baskets.                                    |
  | Cherries and Baskets.                                        |
  | Currants. Each 13x18.                                        |
  | Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4.                          |
  | Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2--for    $8.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and Six American Landscapes.    |
  | (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9, price $9.00--for                   $9.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $10 chromos:                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Sunset in California. (Bierstadt) 18-1/8 x 12                |
  | Easter Morning. 14 x 21.                                     |
  | Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-3/8.                        |
  | Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromos,)              |
  | 15-1/2 x 10-1/2, (companions, price $10.00 for the two),     |
  | for $10.00                                                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank   |
  | Checks on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be |
  | sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not       |
  | otherwise ordered.                                           |
  |                                                              |
  | Postage of paper is payable at the office where received,    |
  | twenty cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in         |
  | advance; the CHROMOS will be mailed free on receipt of       |
  | money.                                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be       |
  | given. For special terms address the Company.                |
  |                                                              |
  | The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of    |
  | seeing the paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A      |
  | specimen copy sent to any one desirous of canvassing or      |
  | getting up a club, on receipt of postage stamp.              |
  |                                                              |
  | Address,                                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | P.O. Box 2783.                                               |
  |                                                              |
  | No. 83 Nassau Street, New York.                              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

[Illustration: DODD'S LANDLADY IS VERY LAVISH OF "FLY-PAPER," AND, AS
DODD NEVER KNOWS WHERE HE PUTS HIMSELF OR HIS HAT, THE RESULT IS RATHER
AMUSING.]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          "The Printing House of the United States."          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GEO. F. NESBITT & CO.,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    General JOB PRINTERS,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  BLANK BOOK Manufacturers,                   |
  |              STATIONERS, Wholesale and Retail,               |
  |             LITHOGRAPHIC Engravers and Printers.             |
  |             COPPER-PLATE Engravers and Printers,             |
  |                     CARD Manufacturers,                      |
  |                   ENVELOPE Manufacturers,                    |
  |                 FINE CUT and COLOR Printers.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |              163, 165, 167, and 169 PEARL ST.,               |
  |            73, 75, 77, and 79 PINE ST., New York.            |
  |                                                              |
  |       ADVANTAGES. All on the same premises, and under        |
  |          immediate supervision of the proprietors.           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |               Tourists and Pleasure Travelers                |
  |                                                              |
  | will be glad to learn that that the Erie Railway Company has |
  |                          prepared.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    COMBINATION EXCURSION                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                              OR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Round Trip Tickets,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |      Valid during the the entire season, and embracing       |
  |    Ithaca--headwaters of Cayuga Lake--Niagara Falls, Lake    |
  |   Ontario, the River St. Lawrence, Montreal, Quebec, Lake    |
  |  Champlain, Lake George, Saratoga, the White Mountains, and  |
  |  all principal points of interest in Northern New York, the  |
  |  Canadas, and New England. Also similar Tickets at reduced   |
  |  rates, through Lake Superior, enabling travelers to visit   |
  |    the celebrated Iron Mountains and Copper Mines of that    |
  | region. By applying at the Offices of the Erie Railway Co.,  |
  |     Nos. 241, 529 and 957 Broadway; 205 Chambers St.; 38     |
  |  Greenwich St.; cor. 125th St. and Third Avenue Harlem; 338  |
  |   Fulton St. Brooklyn; Depots foot of Chambers Street, and   |
  |  foot of 23rd St, New York; No. 3 Exchange Place, and Long   |
  |   Dock Depot, Jersey City, and the Agents at the principal   |
  | hotels, travelers can obtain just the Ticket they desire, as |
  |            well as all the necessary information.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |         PRANG'S LATEST PUBLICATIONS: "Wild Flowers,"         |
  |               "Water-Lilies," "Chas. Dickens."               |
  |                                                              |
  |    PRANG'S CHROMOS sold in all Art Stores throughout the     |
  |                            world.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |    PRANG'S ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE sent free on receipt of     |
  |                            stamp.                            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |     With a large and varied experience in the management     |
  | and publication of a paper of the class herewith submitted,  |
  |    and with the still more positive advantage of an Ample    |
  |           Capital to justify the undertaking, the            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |         Presents to the public for approval, the new         |
  |                                                              |
  |              ILLUSTRATED HUMOROUS AND SATIRICAL              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        WEEKLY PAPER,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |          The first number of which was issued under          |
  |                       date of April 2.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ORIGINAL ARTICLES,                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Suitable for the paper, and Original Designs, or suggestive  |
  | ideas or sketches for illustrations, upon the topics of the  |
  |  day, are always acceptable and will be paid for liberally.  |
  |                                                              |
  |      Rejected communications cannot be returned, unless      |
  |                 postage stamps are inclosed.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                            TERMS:                            |
  |                                                              |
  |  One copy, per year, in advance                       $4.00  |
  |                                                              |
  |  Single copies                                          .10  |
  |                                                              |
  |         A specimen copy will be mailed free upon the         |
  |                    receipt of ten cents.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |     One copy, with the Riverside Magazine, or any other      |
  |  magazine or paper, price, $2.50, for                 $5.50  |
  |                                                              |
  |  One copy, with any magazine or paper, price, $4, for $7.00  |
  |                                                              |
  |  All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 83 Nassau Street,                     |
  |                   P.O. Box 2783, NEW YORK.                   |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.                 |
  |                                                              |
  | The New Burlesque Serial, Written expressly for PUNCHINELLO  |
  |                     BY ORPHEUS C. KERR,                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Commenced in No. 11, will be continued weekly throughout the |
  |                            year.                             |
  |                                                              |
  | A sketch of the eminent author written by his bosom friend,  |
  |                 with superb illustrations of                 |
  |                                                              |
  |    1ST. THE AUTHOR'S PALATIAL RESIDENCE AT BEGAD'S HILL,     |
  |                 TICKNOR'S FIELDS, NEW JERSEY                 |
  |                                                              |
  | 2D. THE AUTHOR AT THE DOOR OF SAID PALATIAL RESIDENCE, taken |
  |  as he appears "Every Saturday," will also be found at the   |
  |                         same number.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |   Single Copies, for sale by all newsmen, (or mailed from    |
  |                this office, free,) Ten Cents.                |
  |                                                              |
  |     Subscription for One Year, one copy, with $2 Chromo      |
  |                         Premium, $4.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |  Those desirous of receiving the paper containing this new   |
  |    serial, which promises to be the best ever written by     |
  | ORPHEUS C. KERR, should subscribe now, to insure its regular |
  |                       receipt weekly.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |   We will send the first Ten Numbers of PUNCHINELLO to any   |
  |  one who wishes to see them, in view of subscribing, on the  |
  |                   receipt of SIXTY CENTS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |   PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, P.O. Box 2783. 83 Nassau   |
  |                        St., New York                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Geo. W. Wheat & Co. Printers, No. 8 Spruce Street.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 24, September
10, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 1, NO. 24 ***

***** This file should be named 10032.txt or 10032.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/3/10032/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


