The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 26, September 24,
1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 26, September 24, 1870

Author: Various

Release Date: November 10, 2003 [EBook #10034]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 1, NO. 26 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           CONANT'S                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PATENT BINDERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO,"                        |
  |                                                              |
  | to preserve the paper for binding, will be sent postpaid, on |
  |                  receipt of One Dollar, by                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |               83 Nassau Street, New York City.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                        CARBOLIC SALVE                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Recommended by Physicians.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |     The best Salve in use for all disorders of the Skin,     |
  |                 for Cuts, Burns, Wounds, &c.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                      USED IN HOSPITALS.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SOLD BY ALL DRUGGISTS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                       PRICE 25 CENTS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |               JOHN F. HENRY, Sole Proprietor,                |
  |                No. 8 College Place, New York.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |     These Pens are of a finer duality, more durable, and     |
  | cheaper than any other Pen in the market. Special attention  |
  |   is called to the following grades as being better suited   |
  |     for business purposes than any Pen manufactured. The     |
  |                                                              |
  |            "505," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"            |
  |            we recommend for Bank and Office use.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                Sole Agents for United States.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


Vol 1.  No. 26.


PUNCHINELLO


SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1870.


PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD,

By ORPHEUS C. KERR,

Continued in this Number.

       *       *       *       *       *

See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.

       *       *       *       *       *

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound Volume No. 1.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |     The first volume of PUNCHINELLO, ending with No. 26,     |
  |                     September 24, 1870,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound in Fine Cloth,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |         will be ready for delivery on Oct. 1, 1870.          |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Sent postpaid to any part of the United States on receipt of |
  |                            price.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of the paper for one year, from October 1st, No. 27,  |
  |  and the Bound Volume (the latter prepaid,) will be sent to  |
  |                  any subscriber for $5.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Three copies for one year, and three Bound Volumes, with an  |
  |  extra copy of Bound Volume, to any person sending us three  |
  |                  subscriptions for $16.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            One copy of paper for one year, with a            |
  |             fine chromo premium, for------ $4.00             |
  |                                                              |
  |                Single copies, mailed free .10                |
  |                                                              |
  |     Back numbers can always be supplied, as the paper is     |
  |                        electrotyped.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |           Book canvassers will find this volume a            |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Very Saleable Book.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |         Orders supplied at a very liberal discount.          |
  |                                                              |
  |              All remittances should be made in               |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Post Office orders.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |               Canvassers wanted for the paper,               |
  |                                                              |
  |                         everywhere.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Punchinello Publishing Co.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     83 NASSAU ST., N. Y.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                      P.O. Box No, 2783.                      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO NEWS-DEALERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Punchinello's Monthly.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Weekly Numbers for August,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bound in a Handsome Cover,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               Is now ready. Price Fifty Cents.               |
  |                                                              |
  |                          THE TRADE                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Supplied by the                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |           Who are now prepared to receive Orders.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       WEVILL & HAMMAR,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Wood Engravers,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                        208 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bowling Green Savings-Bank                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         33 Broadway                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                           NEW YORK                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M,             |
  |                                                              |
  |             _Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents             |
  |         to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be received._          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Six per Cent interest,                    |
  |                   Free of Government Tax.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            Commences on the First of every Month.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   HENRY SMITH _President_                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary_                 |
  |                                                              |
  |        WALTER ROCHE, EDWARD HOGAN, _Vice-Presidents._        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         NEWS DEALERS                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                              ON                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          RAILROADS,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEAMBOATS,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                            And at                            |
  |                       WATERING PLACES,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |               Will find the Monthly Numbers of               |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    For April, May, June, July, and August, an attractive     |
  |                      and Saleable Work                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Single Copies Price 50 cts.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |        For trade price address American News Co., or         |
  |                                                              |
  |                  PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       83 Nassau Street                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       FORST & AVERELL,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |             Steam, Lithograph, and Letter Press              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          PRINTERS,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               EMBOSSERS, ENGRAVERS, AND LABEL                |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |      Sketches and Estimates furnished upon application       |
  |                                                              |
  |           23 Platt Street, and 20-22 Gold Street,            |
  |                                                              |
  |                       [P.O. Box 2845]                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                           NEW YORK                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                      20-22 Gold Street,                      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           FOLEY'S                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          GOLD PENS                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    The Best and Cheapest                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                         256 Broadway                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    $2 to ALBANY and TROY                     |
  |                                                              |
  |     The Day Line Steamboats, C. Vibbard and Daniel Drew,     |
  |  commencing May 31. will leave Vestry st. Pier at 8.45, and  |
  | Thirty-fourth st. at 9 a.m., landing at Yonkers, (Nyack, and |
  |   Tarrytown by ferry-boat), Cozzens, West Point, Cornwall,   |
  | Newburgh, Poughkeepsie, Rhinebeck, Bristol, Catskill, Hudson |
  |  and New-Baltimore. A special train of broad-gauge cars in   |
  |    connection with the day boats will leave on arrival at    |
  |  Albany (commencing June 20) for Sharon Springs. Fare $4.25  |
  |  from New York and for Cherry Valley. The Steamboat Seneca   |
  |        will transfer passengers from Albany to Troy.         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         J. NICKINSON                         |
  |                                                              |
  |              begs to announce to the friends of              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO,"                        |
  |                                                              |
  | residing in the country, that, for their convenience, he has |
  |    made arrangements by which, on receipt of the price of    |
  |                                                              |
  |                 ANY STANDARD BOOK PUBLISHED,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |          the same will be forwarded, postage paid.           |
  |                                                              |
  |     Parties desiring Catalogues of any of Our Publishing     |
  |     Houses, can have the same forwarded by inclosing two     |
  |                            stamps                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          OFFICE OF                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      83 Nassau Street,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      [P. O. Box 2783.]                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      HENRY L. STEPHENS,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                           ARTIST,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 FULTON STREET,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       GEO. B. BOWLEND,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Draughtsman & Designer                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 Fulton Street,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Room No. 11, NEW YORK.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.

AN ADAPTATION.

BY ORFHEUS C. KERR

CHAPTER XIX.

THE H. AND H. OF J. BUMSTEAD.

The exquisitely sweet month of the perfectly delicious summer-vacation
having come, Miss CAROWTHERS' Young Ladies have returned again, for a
time, to their respective homes, MAGNOLIA PENDRAGON has gone to the city
and her brother, and FLORA POTTS is ridiculously and absurdly alone.

Under the ardent sun of August, Bumsteadville slowly bakes, like an
ogre's family-dish of stuffed cottages and greens, with here and there
some slowly moving object, like a loose vegetable on a sluggish current
of tidal gravy, and the spire of the Ritualistic church shooting-up at
one end like an incorrigibly perpendicular leg of magnified mutton.

Hotter and hotter comes the breath fiery of nature's cookery, until some
of the stuffing boils out of one cottage, in the shape of the Oldest
Inhabitant, who makes his usual annual remark, that this is the Warmest
Day in ninety-eight years, and then simmers away to some cooler nook
amongst the greens. More and more intolerably quivers the atmosphere of
the sylvan oven with stifling fervency, until there oozes from beneath
the shingled crust of a vegetarian country-boarding-house a parboiled
guest from the City, who, believing himself almost ready to turn, drifts
feebly to where the roads fork and there is a shade more dun; while, to
the speculative mind, each glowing field of corn, or buckwheat, is an
incipient Meal, and each chimney, or barn, a mere temptation to guess
how many Swallows there may be in it.

Upon the afternoon of such a day as this, Miss POTTS is informed, by a
servant, that Mr. BUMSTEAD has arrived, and, sending her his love, would
be pleased to have her come down stairs to him and bring him a fan.

"Why didn't you tell him I wasn't at home, you absurd thing?" cries the
young girl, hurriedly practicing a series of agitated looks and pensive
smiles before her mirror.

"So I did, Miss," answers the attached menial, "but he'd seen you
looking at him with an opera-glass as he came up the path, and said that
he could hear you taking a clean handkerchief out of tho drawer, on
purpose to receive him with, before he'd got to the door."

"Oh, what shall I do? My hands are so red to-day!" sighs FLCKA, holding
her arms above her head, that the blood may retire from the too pinkish
members.

After a pause, and an adjustment of a curl over her right eye and the
scarf at her waist, to make them look innocent, she yields to the
meteorological mania so strikingly prevalent amongst all the other
characters of this narrative, and says that she will receive the visitor
in the yard, near the pump. Then, casting carelessly over her shoulder
that web-like shawl without which no woman nor spider is complete, she
arranges her lips in the glass for the last time, and, with a garden-hat
hanging from the elbow latest singed, goes down, humming
un-suspiciously, into the open-air, with the guileless bearing of one
wholly unprepared for company.

Resting an elbow upon a low iron patent-pump, near a rustic seat, the
Ritualistic organist, in his vast linen coat and imposing straw hat,
looks not unlike an eccentric garden statue, upon which some prudish
slave of modern conventionalities has placed the summer attire of a
western editor. The great heat of the sun upon his back makes him
irritable, and when Miss POTTS sharply smites with her fan the knuckles
of the hand which he has affably extended to take her by the chin, more
than the usual symptoms of acute inflammation appear at the end of his
nose, and he blows hurriedly upon his wounded digits.

"That hurt like the mischief!" he remarks, in some anger. "I don't know
when I've felt anything smart so."

"Then don't be so horrid," returns the pensive girl, taking a seat
before him upon the rustic settee, and abstractedly arranging her dress
so that only two-thirds of a gaiter-boot can be seen.

Munching cloves, the aroma of which ladens the air all around him, Mr.
BUMSTEAD contemplates her with a calmness which would be enthralling,
but for the nervous twisting of his features under the torments of a
singularly adhesive fly.

"I have come, dear," he observes, slowly, "to know how soon you will be
ready for me to give you your next music-lesson?"

"I prefer that you would not call me your 'dear,'" was the chilling
answer.

The organist thinks for a moment, and then nods his head intelligently.
"You are right," he says, gravely, "--there _might_ be somebody
listening who could not enter into our real feelings. And now, how about
those music-lessons?"

"I don't want any more, thank you," says FLORA, coldly. "While we are
all in mourning for our poor, dear absurd EDDY, it seems like a
perfectly ridiculous mockery to be practicing the scales."

Fanning himself with his straw hat, Mr. BUMSTEAD shakes his bushy head
several times. "You do not discriminate sufficiently," he replies.
"There are kinds of music which, when performed rapidly upon the violin,
fife, or kettle-drum, certainly fill the mind with sentiments
unfavorable to the deeper anguish of human sorrow. Of such, however, is
not the kind made by young girls, which is at all times a help to the
intensity of judicious grief. Let me assure you, with the candor of an
idolized friend, that some of the saddest hours of my life have been
spent in teaching you to try to sing a humorous aria from DONIZETTI; and
the moments in which I have most sincerely regretted ever having been
born were those in which you have played, in my hearing, the
Drinking-song from _La Traviata_. Believe me, then, my devoted pupil,
there can be nothing at all inconsistent with a prevalence of profound
melancholy in your continued piano-playing; whereas, on the contrary,
your sudden and permanent cessation might at least surprise your friends
and the neighborhood into a light-heartedness temporarily oblivious of
the memory of that dear, missing boy, to whom you could not, I hear,
give the love already bestowed upon me."

"I loved him ridiculously, absurdly, with my whole heart," cries FLORA,
not altogether liking what she has heard. "I'm real sorry, too, that
they think somebody has killed him."

Mr, BUMSTEAD folds his brown linen arms as he towers before her, and the
dark circles around his eyes appear to shrink with the intensify of his
gaze.

"There are occasions in life," he remarks, "when to acknowledge that our
last meeting with a friend, who has since mysteriously disappeared, was
to reject him and imply a preference for his uncle, may be calculated to
associate us unpleasantly with that disappearance, in the minds of the
censorious, and invite suspicions tending to our early cross-examination
by our Irish local magistrate. I do not say, of course, that you
actually destroyed my nephew for fear he should try to prejudice me
against you; but I cannot withhold my earnest approval of your judicious
pretence of a sentiment palpably incompatible with the shedding of the
blood of its departed object. If you will move your dress a little, so
that I can sit beside you and allow your head to rest upon my shoulder,
that fan will do for both of us, and we may converse in whispers."

"My head upon _your_ shoulder!" exclaims Miss POTTS, staring swiftly
about to see if anybody is looking. "I prefer to keep my head upon my
own shoulders, sir."

"Two heads are better than one," the Ritualistic organist reminds her.
"If a little hair-oil and powder _does_ come off upon my coat, the
latter will wash, I suppose. Come, dearest, if it is our fate to never
get through this hot day alive, let us be sunstruck together."

She shrinks timidly from the brown linen arm which he begins insinuating
along the back of the rustic settee, and tells him that she couldn't
have believed that he could be so absurd. He draws back his arm, and
seems hurt.

"FLORA," he says, tenderly, "how beautiful you are, especially when
fixed up. The more I see of yon, the less sorry I am that I have
concluded to be yours. All the time that my dear boy was trying to
induce you to relase him from his engagement, I was thinking how much
better you might do; yet, beyond an occasional encouraging wink, I never
gave the least sign of reciprocating your attachment. I did not think it
would be right"

The assertion, though superficially true, is so imperfect in its
delineation of habitual conduct liable to another construction, that the
agitated Flowerpot returns, with quick indignation, "your arm was always
reaching out whenever you sat in a chair anywhere near me, and whenever
I sang you always kept looking straight into my mouth until it tickled
me. You know you did, you hateful thing! Besides, it wasn't you that I
preferred, at all; it was--oh, it's too ridiculous to tell!"

In her bashful confusion she is about to arise and trip shyly away from
him into the house, when he speaks again.

"Miss POTTS, is your friendship for Miss PENDRAGON and her brother such,
that their execution upon some Friday of next month would be a spectacle
to which you could give no pleased attention?"

"What do you mean, you absurd creature?"

"I mean," continues Mr. BUMSTEAD, "simply this: you know my double loss.
You know that, upon the person of the male PENDRAGON was found an apple
looking and tasting like one which my nephew once had. You know, that
when Miss PENDRAGON went from here she wore an alpaca waist which looked
as though it had been exposed more than once to the rain.--See the
point?"

FLORA gives a startled look, and says: "I don't see it."

"Suppose," he goes on--"suppose that I go to a magistrate, and say:
'Judge, I voted for you, and can influence a large foreign vote for you
again. I have lost a nephew who was very fond of apples, and a black
alpaca umbrella of great value. A young Southerner, who has not lived in
this State long enough to vote, has been found in possession of an apple
singularly like the kind generally eaten by my missing relative, and his
sister has come out in a waist made of second-hand alpaca?'--See the
point now?"

"Mr. BUMSTEAD," exclaims FLORA, affrighted by the terrible menace of his
manner, "I don't any more believe that Mr. PENDRAGON is guilty than I,
myself, am; and as for your old umbrella--"

"Stop, woman!" interrupted the bereaved organist, imperiously. "Not even
your lips shall speak disrespectfully of my lost bone-handled friend. By
a chain of unanswerable argument, I have shown you that I hold the fate
of your southern acquaintances in my hands, and shall be particularly
sorry if you force me to hang Mr. PENDRAGON as a rival."

FLORA puts her hands to her temples, to soothe her throbbing head and
display a bracelet.

"Oh, what shall I do! I don't want anybody to be hung! It must be so
perfectly awful!"

Her touching display of generous feeling does not soften him. On the
contrary, he stands more erect, and smiles rather triumphantly under his
straw hat.

"Beloved one," he murmurs, in a rich voice, "I find that I cannot induce
you to make the first advance toward the mutual avowal we are both
longing for, and must therefore precipitate our happiness myself. My
poor boy would not have given you perfect satisfaction, and your
momentary liking for the male PENDRAGON was but the effect of a
temporary despair undoubtedly produced by my seeming coldness. That
coldness had nothing to do with my heart, but resulted partially from my
habit of wearing a wet towel on my head. I now propose to you--"

"Propose to me?" ejaculates Miss POTTS, with heightened color.

"--That you pick out a worthy man belonging to your own section of the
Union," he continues hastily. "Here's my Heart," he adds, going through
the motions of taking something from a pocket and placing it in his
outstretched palm, "and here's my Hand,"--placing therein an equally
imaginary object from another pocket.--"Try the H. and H. of J.
BUMSTEAD."

His manner is as though he were commending some patent article of
unquestionable utility.

"But I can't bear the sight of you!" she cries, pushing away the brown
linen arm coming after her again.

Taking away her fan, he pats her on the head with it, and seems
momentarily surprised at the hollow sound.

"Future Mrs. BUMSTEAD," he cheerfully replies, at last, "my observation
and knowledge of the women of America teach me that there never was a
wife going to Indiana for a divorce, who had not at first sworn to love,
as well as honor and obey, her husband. Such is woman that if she had
felt and said at the altar that she couldn't bear the sight of him, it
wouldn't have been in the power of masculine brutality and dissipated
habits to drive her from his side through all their lives. There can be
no better sign of our future happiness, than for you to say, beforehand,
that you utterly detest the man of your choice."

There is something terrible to the young girl in the original turn of
thought of this fascinating man. Say what she may, he at once turns it
into virtual devotion to himself. He appears to have a perfectly
dreadful power to hang everybody; he considers her strongest avowal of
present personal dislike the most promising indication she can give of
eternal future infatuation with him, and his powerful mode of reasoning
is more profound and composing than an article in a New York newspaper
on a War in Europe. Rendered dizzy by his metaphysical conversation, she
arises from the rustic seat, and is flying giddily into the house, when
he leaps athletically after her, and catches her in the doorway.

"I merely wish to request," he says, quietly, "that you place sufficient
restraint upon your naturally happy feelings to keep our engagement a
secret from the public at present, as I can't bear to have boys calling
out after me, 'There's the feller that's goin' to get married! There's
the feller that's goin' to get married!' When a man is about to make a
fool of himself, it is not for children to remind him of it."

The door being opened before she can answer, FLORA receives a parting
bow of Grandisonian elegance from Mr. BUMSTEAD, and hastens up stairs to
her room in a distraction of mind not uncommon to those having
conversational relations with the Ritualistic organist.

_(To be Continued.)_

       *       *       *       *       *

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by the
PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY, in the Clerk's Office of the District
Court of the United States, for the Southern District of New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

A GOOD FIGHT.

We presume that all the Boston people "lecture" at times; at any rate
they could, if they wanted to. No one doubts their ability.

But, let the number of these imparters of information be ever so great,
we have reason to doubt whether any other of these accomplished parties
has grappled with so formidable, so tremendous a subject, as that which
is now exciting the powerful mind of Miss LILLIAN EDGARTON.

She is going to do it, though! If her life is spared, and her
constitution remains free from blight, (both of which felicities we
trust will be hers,) that subject has got to come under.

That all may know how great is the task, and the confidence required to
pitch into it, we announce, with a flourish, that Miss L. E. is about to
attack that well-known Saurian Monster, termed GOSSIP! Considered as a
Disease, she proposes to find the Cause and the Cure. Considered as a
living and gigantic Nuisance (by far surpassing any Dragon described by
SPENSER,) she designs to hunt him out and slay him incontinently.

Courage, fair Knight! Our eldest Son is kept in reserve for some such
Heroine! If you would be famous, if you would make a perfect thing of
this Crusade, if you would render the lives of your fellow mortals
longer and happier, if you would win that noble and ingenuous youth, our
son, go in vehemently!

And, while you are about it, LILLIAN, would you object to giving your
attention to certain relations of the monster which you propose to slay?
We name them, Detraction and Calumny. They are tough old Dragons, now,
we tell you; perhaps it were best to fight shy of them.

We have it, LILLIAN! Leave 'em to us! Us, with a big U! You kill little
Gossip, and see how quick his brothers and sisters will fall, before our
mighty battle-axe!

(And so they will fall, sure enough, but it will be simply because when
our dear young knight, L.E., has killed _her_ Dragon, she will have
wiped out the whole brood! They can't live without their sweet and
attractive little sister. And so, like many a bigger humbug, we shall
take great credit, that belongs to somebody else, and assume to have
done big things, at enormous expense of blood and money. Trust us, for
that!)

       *       *       *       *       *

NAPOLEON III AT SEDAN.

September, 1870.

     I _was_ an Emperor. _Voila c'est bon!_
       BAZAINE, MACMAHON, fought--'twas my affair.
     Only, to please my doctor, NELATON,
       I left the throne, to take a Sedan chair.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unlimited Lie-Ability.

_Veritas_ writes to say that as he was crossing the ferry from Wall
Street to Brooklyn, yesterday afternoon, he counted 117 persons reading
PUNCHINELLO. He did not observe a single copy of the _Sun_ on board,
until the boat neared Brooklyn, when a man of squalid appearance
produced from a dirty newspaper some soiled articles, all of which
seemed to have been steeped in Lye, from contact with the sheet, which
proved to be the _Sun._

       *       *       *       *       *

A Con for the "Ninth."

What is there in common between Colonel FISK'S war-horse and a New York
Ice Company?

Both are tremendous Chargers.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

Here I am again, back from the seashore, to find the theatres opening,
the war closing, and GREELEY burning to imitate the late French Emperor,
by leading the Republican hosts to defeat in the Fall campaign, so as to
be in a position to write to the Germanically named HOFFMAN--"As I
cannot fall, ballot in hand, at the head of my repeaters, I surrender to
your victorious Excellency."

Being back, I went to see _Julius Caesar_ at NIBLO'S Garden. It was the
day when the French CAESER fell, and the impertinent soothsayer,
ROCHEFORT, who had so often advised him to beware, not of the Ides of
March, but of the _Idees Napoleoniennes,_ (there is a feeble attempt at
a pun here) obtained his liberty, and the right to assail in his
newspaper, the virtue of every female relative of the Imperial family.
Of course I know that JULIUS CAESAR was not a Frenchman--for the modesty
of his "Commentaries" is proverbial--and that SHAKESPEARE never so much
as heard of the Man of December. Nevertheless the two CAESARS were
inextricably mixed up in my mind. I know that two or three editorial
persons who sat close by me, were continually talking of NAPOLEON, and I
may possibly have confounded their remarks with those of the actors.
Still I could not divest myself of the impression that I was sometimes
in Paris and sometimes in Rome, and that the sepulchral voice of Mr.
THEODORE HAMILTON, was more often that of NAPOLEON than that of JULIUS.
The play presents itself to my recollection in the following shape. As I
said before, it was represented at the very moment that the French
republicans, being satisfied with the bees in their respective bonnets,
were obliterating the imperial bees from the doors of the Tuileries, and
being anxious to take arms against a sea of Prussians, were taking down
the imperial arms wherever they could find them. Remembering this, the
reader will be able to account for any slight difference in text between
my _Julius Caesar,_ and that of the respectable and able Mr. SHAKESPEARE.

ACT I.--_Enter various Irish Roman Citizens, flourishing the shillelahs
of the period._

1ST. CITIZEN. "Here's a row. Great CAESAR is going to march to Berlin.
Hooray for the Hemperor."

1ST EDITORIAL PERSON. "I grant you he was popular when the war began,
but to-day the people despise him."

CASSIUS. "I hate this CAESAR. Once he tried to swim across the British
Channel with a tame eagle on his shoulder, and couldn't do it. When he
is sick he takes anti-bilious pills, like any other man. Obviously he
don't deserve to live."

CASCA. (_Who is fat enough to know better, and not pretend to be
discontented_.) "Let's kill him and break all the glass in the windows
of Paris."

BRUTUS. "My friend, those who live in stone houses should never throw
glass about. I don't mean anything by this, but it sounds oracular, and
will make people think I am a profound philosopher."

EDITORIAL PERSON. "What I say is this. He, CAESAR, governed the Roman
rabble vastly better than they deserved. His only mistakes were, in not
sending CASSIUS, who was a sort of ROCHEFORT, without ROCHEFORT'S
cowardice, to the galleys, and in not sending BRUTUS as Minister to some
capital so dreary that he would have shot himself as soon as he reached
his destination."

ACT II.--_Enter_ BRUTUS _and fellow radicals._

BRUTUS. "I have no complaint against CAESAR, and I therefore gladly join
your noble band of assassins. We will kill him and establish a
provisional government with myself at its head. CAESAR is ambitious, and
I hate ambition. All I want is to be the ruler of Rome."

CASSIUS. "Come, my brave fellows. Haste to the stabbing. Away! Away!"

EDITORIAL PERSON. "What a farce is history. Here are PUMBLECHOOK, BRUTUS
and JOHN WILKES CASSIUS held up as models of excellence and integrity.
What did they and their fellow scoundrels do after they had killed
CAESAR, but desolate their country with civil war?"

ACT III.--_Enter_ ASSASSINS _headed by_ BRUTUS _and_ GAMBETTA, CASSIUS
_and_ ROCHEFORT.

CASSIUS. "Here is CAESAR with his back toward us, fighting the German's
hordes. Let us steal up and stab him before he can help himself." _(They
stab him.)_

CASSIUS. "Now we will kick his wife out of Paris and smash his
furniture. We will all become a Provisional Government, and fix
everything to suit ourselves. I will revive my newspaper, and hire a
staff from the New York _Sun,_ who will make it more scurrilous than
ever."

_Enter the Parisian populace crying, "Hooray for_ CAESAR."

CASSIUS. "Hush. CAESAR is dead, and we are going to proclaim a republic.
Begin and abuse him with all your might. We'll let you smash some
windows presently."

POPULACE. "Hooray. The tyrant has fallen. Let's go and insult his wife
and smash everything generally."

1ST EDITORIAL PERSON. "Yesterday these precious rascals voted for him.
To-day they insult him--it being safe to do so--and to-morrow they will
want him back again."

2ND EDITORIAL PERSON, "There lies the ruins of the noblest nephew of his
uncle that ever lived in France or elsewhere. He was unscrupulous, I
admit, but he knew how to rule. Shall we stay and hear MARK ANTONY
praise him, and set the fickle rabble at the throats of ROCHEFORT and
BRUTUS, and their gang?"

1ST EDITORIAL PERSON. "That will take place very shortly, but I can't
wait for it. I must go home to write an editorial welcoming the new
republic, and prophesying all manner of success for it. The American
people like that sort of trash, though they have already twice seen the
French try republican institutions only to make a muddle of them."

2ND EDITORIAL PERSON. "What do you think of the actors here at NIBLO'S."

1ST EDITORIAL PERSON. "DAVENPORT is good but heavy, BARRETT rants like a
raving French radical. MONTGOMERY is excellent, and the rest are so so."

And the undersigned having seen the French revolution played on the
Roman stage at NIBLO'S, also went home without waiting to see the
prophetic fourth and fifth acts, in which the conspirators come to
grief, and the empire is reestablished. We shall read all about it in
the cable dispatches a few months hence. Good Heavens! who can listen
calmly to the speeches of the players, while the grandest drama of the
century is acting across the sea, where a mad populace, freed from the
firm grasp of its master, breaks windows and howls itself hoarse as the
best preparations for holding the fairest of cities against the
resistless veterans of VON MOLTKE.

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Insurrectionary.

PUNCHINELLO, pondering over the vast sums that have been forwarded to
Cuba, in aid of the insurrectionary movements there, and struck with the
disadvantages under which the promoters of liberty labor in that sunny
isle, blesses his stars that, thanks to the enterprise of Miss SUSAN B.
ANTHONY, he can raise a Revolution in New York City, at any time,
for ten cents. Let those whom it may concern take heed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bluff King Bill.

L.N. declared his determination to kick old King BILLY, of Prussia, off
from French territory. Well, it would only have been a new illustration
of "footing the Bill."

       *       *       *       *       *

Query.

As soon as the abominable fat-boiling nuisances have been abolished,
will it be right to say that they have fallen into de-_suet_-ude?

       *       *       *       *       *

A Seasonable Conundrum.

Why is New York City like the ex-Emperor of the French?
Because it has just got rid of its Census.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Suggestion.

In consideration of the splendid jewels worn by him, might not Colonel
JIM FISK be more appropriately called Colonel GEM FISK.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE SPIRIT OF THE WAR.

A Sketch In the Bowery.

_Small Frenchman._ "WHAT FOR YOU HIT ME WITH YOUR DAMBABY VEN YOU PASS?"

_Big German._ "WANTS TO FIGHT?--DINKS YOU CAN WHIP ME, EH?"

_Small Frenchman._ "NO--BUT I CAN GIVE YOUR DAMBABY ONE BLACK EYE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

BY GEORGE!

LAKE GEORGE, August 30.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO:--I arrived here last Saturday, and as I would be the
last person to allow a commendable enterprise to languish for want of
proper encouragement, and in order to put the Hotel proprietors out of
suspense, I thought I would let you know without further delay that I
consider Lake George a success.

Not being expected, as I supposed, I must admit I was somewhat gratified
to find a full band playing on the veranda as the coach I was in drove
up.

It was a sort of delicate attention, you know.

I notice, however, that they continue playing in the afternoon since
then, I suppose it struck them as a good idea at the time.

The Fort William Henry Hotel is a gorgeous affair in every respect. It
is situated very near the old original Fort, just where the French
troops advanced to capture it, and made their celebrated charges.

Perhaps the present proprietor can't discount them at that sort of
thing.

Perhaps not!

Looking over one's bills reminds you a good deal of the Police Courts,
five dollars fine, twenty-five dollars costs.

The costs they make here are very good, however, altho' they do put a
little too much mint in them, I must say.

L.G. is all right, though. It is supplied with all the modern
conveniences. It isn't within five minutes walk of the post office, but
its water conveniences are apparent to all. There is no end to its
belles, and as for its ranges, it has two of them--both Adirondacks.

Yesterday I took a trip up the Lake and across to its neighbor,
Champlain.

Everybody takes this trip because its "the thing," and it is therefore
particularly necessary to take it. Ostensibly, you go to view the
scenery, really, to be inveigled into paying for a low comedy of a
dinner at the other end.

The first place our boat stopped at is called the "Trout Pavillion,"
principally, so far as I can learn, on account of the immense number of
pickerel caught there, and from the fact that it is unquestionably a
good site for a Pavillion whenever the esteemed Proprietor turns up
jacks enough, at his favorite game, to build one.

The next place was set down in the Guide Book as the "Three Sisters"
Islands, an appellation arising from the fact that there are precisely
_four_ of them.

I mentioned this apparent discrepancy to the boat clerk.

This young man, who belongs to a Base Ball Club, informs me that these
islands invariably travelled with a "substitute," as one occasionally
got "soaked."

This certainly seems a little curious, but as the young man says he was
born here, I suppose he knows.

This same young man pointed out a beautiful spot called Green Island and
asked me if I wouldn't like to live there.

He said he thought it would just suit me.

The attention of these people is really delightful.

Some of these places, however, have very inappropriate names, for
instance another little gem is called "Hog Island." No one knows why it
was so called. The clerk of the boat don't either.

He wanted to know if I had ever dined there.

I always make it a point to get on the right side of these Steamboat
fellows, always.

About half way up the Lake is a place called Tongue Mountain.

A long time ago a colony of strong-minded women settled there.

That may have had something to do with its name.

Nobody ever goes there now.

People go very near the mountain in boats, however, as it is noted for
something very extraordinary in the Echo line.

It has what is called a "Double Echo."

I fully expected something of this kind.

Now if there is anything I am particularly down on, it is those
unmitigated frauds known as Echoes. And if I ever throw four sixes, it
is when I am tackling some unsuspecting old ass of a watering place
echo.

I consider them "_holler_ mockeries."

Of course we steamed within proper distance, and I seized the
opportunity to "put a head on" this venerable two-ply nuisance, as
follows:

First, I read a page of a Patent Office Report I go armed with.

This the Echo, with very little hesitation, repeated in duplicate as
usual. From one side of the rock in English, and from the other in fair
French.

I saw at once that old EK was pretty well filled.

Next I sang "Listen to the Mocking Bird," which it repeated very
creditably indeed, dropping but two notes on the third verse. This it
made up for, I am bound to admit, by throwing in some original
variations in the chorus.

But I hadn't played from my sleeve yet, so I recited HAMLET'S Soliloquy.

From the wooded slope on our right came the familiar "_To be_" of BOOTH,
while from the sloping woods on our left proceeded a finely rendered
imitation of the Teutonic FECHTER, in the same.

This staggered me!

I had one more jack in my cuff, however. I pulled out a copy of the
Tribune and read a few paragraphs of GREELEY'S "What do I know about
Farming."

_That settled him!_

He never got to the first semi-colon. It knocked the breath right out of
him!

The poor old fossil had to quit. He changed his repeater to a leaver.
But then you see he had held the office a good while.

He hasn't left the business to any one, either.

In future no one will go fooling round there except the fishermen. The
sign is down.

In my next I will finish the Lake trip, and give you some account of the
celebrated "Roger's Slide."

SAGINAW DODD.

[_To be continued._]

       *       *       *       *       *

RAMBLINGS.

BY MOSE SKINNER.

POPULARITY.

Next to talk, popularity is the cheapest thing I know of. It is achieved
by three classes--those who have brains, those who have money, and those
who have neither. The first earn it; the second buy it; and the third
stumble into it, perhaps by waving their hat at an engineer just in time
to prevent the train from dashing over a precipice, or by chopping off
somebody's head with a meat axe and burning the remains up afterwards,
in which case the next day's paper gives a faithful account of their
pedigree, and their photograph can be purchased at any respectable
news-dealers, at a price within reach of all.

The most common-place sayings of popular men are handed down to
posterity, and a casual remark about the weather is often framed and
hung up in the spare-bedroom.

It behooves every public man to keep a sentence or two on hand, with a
view to embalming them for future reference. I wish to state, in
confidence, that if any prominent man who can't think of anything that
sounds well, will address me, I will furnish him at the low price of one
dollar a sentence. My stock is entirely fresh and original, and embraces
such gems as--"Don't give up the ship," "Such is Life," "How's this for
high?" "I die happy," "A stitch in time saves nine," &c., &c.

I am also prepared to furnish "last words of eminent men," at a moderate
compensation.

General GRANT has taken time by the forelock in this matter. His "Let us
have Peace," was a most brilliant effort, because nobody ever thought of
it before. "I propose to move on your works immediately, if it takes all
summer," was also a happy thought.

When General GRANT was in Boston he said he liked the way they made
gravy in Massachusetts. Now this in itself would not, perhaps, be called
deep, because others have said the same thing before, but, coming from a
man like GRANT, it set folks to thinking, and it is not surprising that
something of this sort went the rounds:

    "We have the best authority for stating that General GRANT,
    during his recent visit to Boston, remarked that he was
    gratified at the manner in which gravy was produced in
    Massachusetts. Our talented Chief Magistrate is a man of few
    words, but what he does say is spicy, and to the point."

At the Peace Jubilee, GRANT said he "liked the cannon best;" but the
reporters, being confidentially informed that the remark wasn't intended
for posterity, it didn't get out much. I didn't hear of his saying
anything else.

If a popular man takes cold, the whole public sneeze. His opinions must
go into the papers any how, though perhaps no better than anybody's
else. Thus--from a daily paper:

    "The Hon. MONTGOMERY BLAIR recently said in a private
    conversation, that the present war would probably end in
    victory for the Prussians, and the overthrow of Napoleon."

Supposing he did? I heard JOHN SMITH say the same thing in an eating
saloon over a month ago, and out of twenty gentlemen present, four were
reporters, but they didn't take out their note books in breathless haste
and put down the Hon. JOHN SMITH'S opinion, how Mr. SMITH looked when he
said it, and if he said it as though he really meant it, and in a manner
that thrilled his listeners.

But JOHN hasn't any popularity, you see, and the Hon. MONTGOMERY
has--though it may be a little mildewed.

Soon after the war, I wrote an article on the Alabama Claims. It was a
masterly effort, and cost me a month's salary to get it inserted in a
popular magazine. If that article had proved a success, I could easily
have gulled the public all my life on the popularity thus achieved.

But I made a wretched mistake to start with. Instead of heading it "The
Alabama Claims," "By CHARLES SUMNER," or "HORACE GREELEY." I said "By
MOSE SKINNER."

I will not dwell on the result. Suffice it to say that I soon after
retired from literature, a changed being, utterly devoid of hope.

MORAL SUASION.

A friend of mine, an eminent New York philanthropist, relates the
following interview with a condemned criminal. The crime for which this
wretched man was hung is still fresh in our memories. One morning at
breakfast his tripe didn't suit him, and he immediately brained his wife
and children and set the house on fire, varying the monotony of the
scene by pitching his mother-in-law down the well, having previously,
with great consideration, touched her heart with a cheese knife.

I will now quote my friends' own words:

"He was pronounced a hard case, manifesting no sorrow for his act, and
utterly indifferent to his approaching doom. A score of good people had
visited him with the kindest intentions, but without making the smallest
impression upon him.

"Without boasting, I wish to say that I knew I could touch this man's
heart. I saw a play once in which the most blood-thirsty and brutal
ruffian that ever existed was melted to tears at the mention of his
mother's name, and childhood's happy hours, and everybody knows that
what happens on the stage happens just the same in real life.

"I naturally congratulated myself on having seen this play, for it gave
me power to cope with this relentless disposition.

"He resisted all attempts at conversation, however, in the most dogged
manner, barely returning surly monosyllables to my anxious wishes for
his well being.

"At last, laying my hand on his shoulder, and throwing considerable
pathos into my voice, I said:

"My friend, it was not always thus with you. There was a time when you
sat upon your mother's knee, and gathered buttercups and daisies?"

"Ah! I had touched the right chord at last. His brow contracted and his
lips twitched convulsively."

"And when that mother put you in your little bed," I continued, "she
kissed you, and hoped you would grow up a--"

"You lie," said he, "she didn't. The old woman was six foot under ground
afore I could chaw. Now, look a here, you're the fourth chap that's
tried the 'mother' dodge on me. Why don't you fellers" he added with a
malicious grin, "go back on the mother business, and give the old man a
chance, jest for a change?"

"After the above scurvy treatment I was naturally anxious to witness the
man's funeral, which I understood was to be a gorgeous affair, six
respectably-attired females having been sworn in to kiss the body, amid
the hysteric weeps of three more in the background."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: PRACTICAL.

_Housewife._ "VAKE YOU UP, HANS--HERE'S ANODER BRUSSIAN VICTORY."

_Hans, (dreamily.)_ "ANODER BRUSSIAN VICTORY?--DEN LET US HAVE ANODER
BRUSSIAN BIER."]

       *       *       *       *       *

Hot and Cold.

The sensational paragraph writers had better "let up" on the question of
an imminent dearth of ice. There is no real probability that we shall be
without ice before winter sets in. It is only for the purpose of keeping
us in hot water that the newspaper men say we shan't have cold water.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: NOT JUST YET!

_Mr. Greeley._ "PRAY, TAKE A SEAT, MR. WOODFORD; I WOULDN'T ON ANY
ACCOUNT DEPRIVE YOU," etc., etc.

_Mr. Woodford._ "No! NO!--TAKE IT YOURSELF, MR. GREELEY; THE LAST THING
I SHOULD THINK OF WOULD BE," etc., etc.

_Governor Hoffman._ "DON'T TROUBLE YOURSELVES, GENTLEMEN: I SHALL
PROBABLY CONTINUE TO OCCUPY THE CHAIR FOR A COUPLE OF YEARS, YET."]

       *       *       *       *       *

COMIC ZOOLOGY.

Genus, Phoca.--The Seal.

This is the common name of the inoffensive and fur-bearing members of
the Phocidae family. The word seal is derived, radically, from the
German _Siegel,_ so that to say a man has "fought mit SIEGEL," is
equivalent to remarking that he has assailed a harmless and timid seal.

The Phocidae, without distinction of sex, are known as Mammafers,
although it would manifestly be more correct to call the males Papafers.
Under the present classification, the confusion of genders necessarily
engenders confusion.

Unless AGASSIZ is gassing us, the true seal has no sign of an ear,
wherefore the deafening roar of the surf in which it delights to sport
is probably no inconvenience to it. As distinguished from dumb beasts in
general, it may properly be called a deaf and dumb animal. The false
seal, on the contrary, has as true an ear as e'er was seen. To the
counterfeits belong the sea lion, the Mane specimen of the tribe in the
Arctic sea, and the sea leopard, which seems to be phocalized in the
Antarctic circle. All the varieties of the seal seek concealment in
caverns, and their Hides are much sought after.

Sealing was at one time chiefly monopolized by adventurous New
Englanders, who combined the pursuit with whaling, but at present the
sealers of Salt Lake bear off the palm from all competitors, both as
regards numbers and hardihood. Whether they combine whaling with sealing
is not positively known, but probably they do. Such is the universal
passion for sealing among the people of that region, that the old men
act like Young men when engaged in this exciting occupation.

The Phocidae appear to have attracted the attention of Mankind at a very
early period--Seals being frequently spoken of in the Scriptures. St.
JOHN witnessed the opening of no less than seven varieties, and must
have been well acquainted with their internal structure.

The earless, or true species, are often seen in considerable numbers on
the British coast, and the Great Seal of England--only to be found in
the vicinity of the Thames--is of such remarkable size and weight, that
it never makes its appearance without producing a strong Impression.

The Green Seal, a much admired variety, is peculiar to Madeira, and
seals of various colors are often seen in close proximity to the
British. Ports; the number taken off Cork being prodigious.

None of the animals of the Phoca genus are tenacious of life. They may
readily be destroyed with sealing whacks. A large stick properly applied
has been known to seal the fate of a dozen in the space of half an hour.
KANE knocked them over without difficulty, and they never attempt to
defend themselves, according to PANEY.

In conclusion, it may be remarked that immense herds of seals cover the
coasts of Alaska. It is nevertheless difficult to catch a glimpse of
them, on account of the enormous flocks of humming birds, which darken
the air in that genial clime. Occasionally, however, the Arctic zephyrs
disperse the feathery cloud, and then vast numbers of the timid
creatures, with a sprinkling of the Walrus, may be seen by looking in a
Se(a)ward direction.

       *       *       *       *       *

A LITTLE ACKNOWLEDGMENT.

The _Free (and Easy) Press_ has honored PUNCHINELLO with a brief as well
as premature obituary paragraph. Flattered as he is by being thus
noticed in the columns of a journal of the long standing and well
sustained popularity of the _Free (and Easy) Press_, it pains
PUNCHINELLO to be obliged to state that he still lives, and that he is
not only alive, but kicking. That he has come to an end, is true--but it
is to the end of his First Volume, as the _F. (and E.) Press_ can see by
turning to the admirably written, dashing, humorous, and absolutely
unsurpassable Index appended to our present number, which Index
PUNCHINELLO cordially recommends to the perusal of the _F. (and E.)
Press_. The Preface to his Second Volume, however, which is now in
preparation, will, PUNCHINELLO confidently assures the _F. (and E.)
Press_, be altogether superior to the Index to his First. Let the _F.
(and E.) Press_ look out for it. But, meanwhile, the _F. (and E.) Press_
can cheer itself by frequent contemplation of the entertaining personage
who serves as tail-piece to the Index, and whose gesture is of that
familiar and suggestive kind that will doubtless be thoroughly
understood by the _F. (and E.) Press_, and, as PUNCHINELLO hopes, fully
appreciated.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "HUMPTY DUMPTY SAT ON THE WALL, HUMPTY DUMPTY HAD A GREAT
FALL."

AND IT HE HAD FALLEN AMONG THE PRUSSIANS, ONLY, IT MIGHTN'T HAVE BEEN SO
BAD FOR HIM; BUT, AS HE ALSO FELL UPON FRENCH BAYONETS, IT IS QUITE
CERTAIN THAT HE CAN NEVER GET UP AGAIN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN IN WALL STREET.

His Celebrated Speech before the Board or Brokers.--A few Words of Sound
Advice from the Squire.

Doorin' a breef sojern in the Emperor City, a deputation of Wall Street
brokers and smashers called and invited me to make a speech afore the
members of their church, whose _Sin_-agog is situated in Brod Street.

Thinks I, if I can make these infatuated worshippers of the Golden Calf,
Mammon, see the error of their ways and take a back track, me thunk my
chances for the White House would be full as flatterin' as Sisters
WOODHUL, GEORGIANA FRANCIS TRAIN, or any other woman, in '72.

Layin' off my duster, and adjustin' my specturcals, at the appinted
hour, I slung the follerin' extemperaneous remarks at 'em:

My infatuated friends and Goverment Bondmen:

As an ex-statesman which has served his country for 4 years as Gustise
of the Peece, raisin' said offis to a hire standard than usual, to say
nothin' about raisin' an interestin' family of eleven morril an hily
intellectooal children, I rise and git up, ontramelled by any politikle
alliances, to say: that when you fellers git on a mussy fit, like the
old woman who undertook to pick her chickens by runnin' them through a
patent hash cutter, you make the feathers fly, and leave your victims in
a hily clawed up stait.

Perfesser ARKIMIDEES, of Oxford, (and here allow me to stait, so as to
avoid newspaper contraryversy, as in the case of DISRALLY'S novel
Lothere, _I have no refference to_ T. GOLDWIN SMITH _whatsomever_, as I
believe ARKIMIDEES is now dead,) said he could raise the hul earth with
a top section of a rale fence, if he could only find something tangible
to rest his timber on.

My friends, that man had never heerd of Wall Street, and I'de bet all
the money I can borrer on it.

With such a prop as this ere little territory, where games of chance are
"entered into accordin' to the act of Congress," to cote from a familiar
passage in every printed copy of PUNCHINELLO, the Perfesser could have
raised this little hemisfeer quicker than any of you chaps can gobble up
a greenhorn.

And, sirs, I'me sorry to be obliged to speak plain, it would be a darned
site more to your credit if you'd try and raise the earth, instead of
daily usin' Wall Street as a base of operations to raise H----,
well--excuse me, the futer asilum for retired brokers.

How do you manage, when you want to make a steak?

You run up stocks and produce a crysis.

Outsiders rush in lickety smash, and invest all the money they can rake
and scrape, in these inflated stocks. Suddenly you prick the bubble,
when, alas! besides the cry-sis, there's more cry-bubs in and about Wall
Street than there was in Egipt, when NAPOLEON BONAPART chopped off the
heads off all the first born. Instances have been known, where a good
many of you chaps have rammed your head in the Tiger's mouth once too
often.

If my memry serves me correctly, FISKE and GOOLD made you perambulate
off on your eyebrows, last fall, and while the a-4-said Tigers walked
off with the seats of your trowserloons in their teeth, you all jined in
the follerin' him:

     Wall Street is all a fleetin' sho',
     From which lame ducks are driven,
     "Up in a balloon they allers go,
     To Tophet, not to Heaven."

Another little dodge of your'n, my misguided friends, is to keel off K.
VANDERBILT.

What did you do t'other day?

Why, when KERNELIUS was engaged in a friendly game of cards for _keeps_,
up at Saratogy, some poor deluded _money_-maniac telegrafs that the
Commodore had at last found his match, and had been gathered to his
fathers. While at the bottom of the dispatch was forged the name of my
friend, KISSLEBURGH, city editor of the _Troy Times_, who, up to the
present time, if this coot knows herself, hain't bin into the hiway
robbin' bizziness, not by a long shot. But, my friends and feller
citizens, old VAN is sharper that a two-edged gimlet.

When he lays down his wallet among a lot of other calf skins, like a
great sponge in a puddle of water, it sucks every square inch of legal
tender, which is in suckin' distance.

For a regler 40 hoss power suction, K. VANDERBILT is your man. I ones
thought I could never take a locker to this 'ere honest old heart, but
as I cast my gaze over this audience, and observe among the Bulls and
Bears, a cuple of Dears, I will retract that, payin' in the follerin'
_Jew de spree_:

     Come rest on this buzzum,
     Oh! butiful broker,
     With your arms clinchin' tite,
     This innercent choker.

     I'le stand it from thee,
     If you'll never go near,
     The Bulls and the Bears,
     When HIRAM is here.

(This impromtu poetikism, Mr. PUNCHINELLO, kicked up quite a little
breeze, in the midst of which the pretty brokers blushed and looked so
bewitchin' like, that it was enuff to make a feller throw stuns at K.
VANDERBILT if the pretty Dears only wanted him to.)

I agin resoomed:

My infatuated friends; afore I wind up, let me give you a few partin'
words of advice.

Give up this 'ere gamblin' bizziness. When you run up gold it hits the
hul mercantile body of this nation a wipe in the stummuck. A good many
little cubs, as well as a few ole Bears, have been gobbled up by your
confounded efforts at runnin' up gold, while you grin and chuckle like
the laffin' hyena, when ransackin' Navy Yards and whisky distilleries.
But, if you insist on goin' ahead and earnin' your daily peck by
smashin' things and layin' out the onsofisticated, all I have got to say
is, that next time you've got a _sure thing_ to make a speck, by
telegrafin' me at Skeensboro, I won't mind comin' down and takin' a hand
in, if my pocketin' a few hundred thousands will be the means of
betterin' your morrils, by my sharin' your burden. In concloosion,
feller citizens, feelin' in rather a poetical mood to-day, I will close
with the follerin' tribute to Wall Street and its inhabitants:

    "Imperious SEIZER, dead, and turned to cla,
    Mite stop a hole to keep the wind away;"
    Onless from Wall Street, was blowin' raw.
    The tempestous breezes, from a broker's flaw.

Amid tumultous cheers, and a general rushin' to DELMONICO'S, where Wall
Street waters her stock, (of lickers,) I sot down.

Ewers, without a dowt,

HIRAM GREEN, Esq.,

_Lait Gustise of the Peece._

       *       *       *       *       *

Stage By-play.

A sporting paper gives the following item:

"Two nines, composed of members of BOOTH'S, WALLACK'S and the Olympic
theatrical companies, played an interesting game of base-ball at the
Union base-ball grounds, last week."

Imagine Sir HARCOURT COURTLEY batting splendidly to DIEDRICK VAN
BEEKMAN'S pitching; or picture Major DE BOOTS waiting patiently on the
short stop for a chance to put Captain ABSOLUTE out on his second base.
The experience of these gentlemen before the footlights may have made
them light-footed, but from mere force of habit they are all pretty sure
to be caught out in the "flies."

       *       *       *       *       *

Professional.

"They may talk about nines," said the Doctor, when base-ball was the
subject under discussion. "They may talk about their nines; but I know
of a nine that would lay them all out in double-quick time, and it is
called Strychnine."

       *       *       *       *       *

A FECULENT NUISANCE.

Persons passing along Nassau Street, between Ann and Beekman Streets,
for some days past, have had their olfactories unpleasantly assailed by
a vile stench. On investigation by officers of the Board of Health, the
foul odor was found to exhale from the premises of 113 Nassau Street.
Further examination disclosed the fact that the nuisance arose from a
quantity of Dead Rabbits deposited on the premises by one JAMES O'BRIEN,
for purposes best known to himself. It is said that the entire concern
is to be handed over to the New York Rendering Company, for conversion
into the kind of tallow used for the manufacture of the cheapest kind of
rush-lights.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Greatest Joke of the Season.

The idea of nominating JAMES O'BRIEN for the office of Mayor of the City
of New York. But it cannot be called a practical joke.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "IT WAS IN THE CHAMPAGNE COUNTRY THAT LOUIS NAPOLEON CAME
TO GRIEF. THE FIZZ OF THE CHAMPAGNE WAS TOO MUCH FOR HIM, AND HE
FIZZLED."--_(Letter from a War Correspondent.)_]

       *       *       *       *       *

PUNCHINELLO AS A "SAVANT."

MR. PUNCHINELLO: I have always taken a profound interest in Science.
When a child my fond parents observed in me a decided taste for
Entomology, the wings and legs of butterflies and grasshoppers being the
objects of my special investigation. As a school-boy I obtained (despite
the frequent closing of my visual organs) considerable Insight into
Physical Science in the course of numerous pugilistic encounters. A
close Application to Optics at that time enabled me to get some Light on
the Subject.

I was quite a phenomenon in Astronomy. While yet an unweaned infant I
made numerous observations on the Milky Way, and when learning to walk
frequently saw stars undiscernable with the most powerful telescope.
Since my arrival at man's estate I have frequently experimented on the
Elasticity of the Precious Metals, but have generally found it extremely
difficult to make both ends meet.

Considering, therefore, that I had as just a claim to be called
scientific, as many who pretend to be _Savants_, I determined to attend
the late Scientific Convention at Troy. My reception was most
gratifying. On presenting my credentials to the Convention, that learned
body welcomed me with open arms, and I was escorted to a place among the
members by its distinguished head.

Some of the speculations of these eminent philosophers were exceedingly
profound, and it is really wonderful, Mr. PUNCHINELLO, to what an extent
theory may be carried in the advance of science.

Mr. GOOSEFELT read a learned and original paper--carefully compiled from
various sources--on the Steam Engine, in the course of which he stated
that his great aunt, who had been blown up on the first steamboat that
ever went down in the Mississippi, during the great Earthquake of 1811,
was still living. Also, that his godfather, the celebrated Mr.
NICODEMUS, assisted (probably in the interests of science) in pulling
down the statue of GEORGE III in the Bowling Green. The importance of
these two facts cannot be over-estimated, as they will undoubtedly give
a tremendous impulse to the wheels of science.

Professor GREYWACKE, the eminent Geologist, delivered an address on
Natural Petrifactions, indicating the various specimens of Ancient
Fossils by which he was surrounded, and describing their formation. The
audience was probably Petrified with astonishment at the immense
learning and research he displayed, for it observed a Stony silence,
only interrupted by an occasional snore.

A brilliant paper on the Illuminating Power of Gas was read by Professor
M.T. HEAD. It was a most Luminous production, and proved conclusively
that an immense expenditure of gas sometimes throws very little Light on
any Subject. The Professor is thoroughly versed in Meters, and is the
author of the "Volume of Gas" which has attracted so much attention in
the scientific world.

Professor SUETT addressed the Scientists on the Effect of Tallow upon
Ox(h)ides. From certain experiments made by him it appears that the
Oleaginous principle is incompatible with Water, and unfavorable to the
action of rust.

A member was of the opinion that this important discovery might be
turned to great practical advantage, as the application of cart grease
to rusty iron axles might possibly facilitate the rotary motion of the
wheels.

This novel and valuable suggestion was hailed with shouts of applause,
and the thanks of the Convention were immediately voted to the
distinguished member, whose name I have unfortunately forgotten.

Professor HYDRAGE read an Essay on the Transit of Mercury, which he said
would take place in the form of a Bed Precipitate in 1878. It may
possibly take place before then, however, as the Faculty of Medicine are
said to be rapidly abandoning the use of calomel.

The State Conchologist read an extremely interesting disquisition on the
Oyster, which was divided into sections and literally devoured by the
audience. He also exhibited some Specimens of Conchs, which were regular
Sneezers in point of size.

An announcement which was made by the distinguished Astronomer,
Professor LOONEY, created a most profound sensation.

He stated that with the aid of a powerful telescope he had discovered an
immense Fissure in the Moon. He was quite positive that he had also
observed a Man in the Gap. Although unable to distinguish the features
of this individual, he thought it might possibly be JAMES STEPHENS, the
missing Fenian Head Centre.

When the excitement consequent upon this startling announcement had
subsided, I rose and addressed the Convention as follows:

"Ladies and Gentlemen: I cannot express, in words, the profound
gratification with which I have listened to the learned and eloquent
addresses which have just been delivered. The advancement of Science is
an object which is worthy the efforts of such distinguished _savants_ as
I see around me, and to this object they have brought that profundity of
learning which is only to be gathered from the perusal of elementary
text books, that almost strabismal acuteness of perception which enables
them to descry such great scientific truths as can be discovered through
an orifice in a barn door, and that wonderful power of discrimination
which enables them to distinguish between the seed of the leguminous
plant known as the bean, and the other vegetable productions of Nature,
when the bag is open.

As an humble member of the Brotherhood of Science, I desire to
contribute, in however insignificant a degree, to the Great Cause of
Learning. I will therefore, with Your Permission, read" (loud cries of
'No! No!' 'Put him out!' etc., to which of course I paid no attention,)
"the following papers: 'An Inquiry as to Whether Diptheria has anything
to do with the Migration of the Swallow,' 'On the possibility of
straightening the curve of the African Shin Bone.' 'On Marine Plants and
Deep Sea Currents.' 'On the Laws of Mechanics, with observations on the
Mechanic's Lien Law and the By-Laws of Trades Unions.' 'Some Reflections
on Reflection.' 'The Connection between Mathematics and Versification,
as illustrated by LOGARHYTHMS.' 'Minute Experiments with the
Hour-Glass,' and 'Important Speculations on the Sea Changes.'"

I proceeded to read the first of the above named papers, but before I
had got very far, Mr. PUNCHINELLO, I was interrupted by a peculiar
sound, which I at first took for subdued applause, but which, on
investigation, I found proceeded from the noses of the audience. In
short, Mr. P., both audience and Convention were in a profound slumber.
Considerably mortified, I withdrew in silence. I am determined, however,
that my theses shall not be lost to posterity. I intend to have them
published, and to send you a copy of each.

Profoundly yours,

CHINCAPIN.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pearing Time.

We learn that "some of the pear trees in Suffolk County are now in
blossom." Surely such a season as this one for pears has never before
been seen. Who knows but the fact may induce SUSAN B. ANTHONY to go
pairing with some Revolutionary bachelor?

       *       *       *       *       *

INDEX

  A.

  About a Clock
  Advice to Picnic Parties
  Aerated Verbiage
  Agricultural Column, Our
  Albany Cock Robins
  Allurements of the Period
  All Aboard for Holland
  All Hail
  American Cutlery in France
  Answers to Correspondents
  Arrah, What Does He Mane, at All?
  Astronomical Conversations
  Associated Press Telegrams
  Augean Job, An

  B.

  Ballad of Capt. Eyre, The
  Bachelor's Moving Day, The
  Bad "Odor" in the West
  Ballad of the Good Litttle Boy aged ten
  "Behold how Pleasant a Thing," &c.
  Beautiful Snow
  Bit of Natural History, A
  Bird of Wisdom in Iowa, The
  Bingham on Rome
  Blocks and Blockheads
  Book Notices
  Boyhood
  Bow-Wow!
  Broadbrim to Aborigine
  Business
  By George

  C.

  Cause and Effect
  Captain Hall, To
  Cable News
  Caution
  Cats, On
  Card of Thanks, A
  Chat about Railroads, A
  Chance for our Organ Grinders, A
  Charge of the Ninth Brigade
  Chinopathy
  China Pattern, A
  Chincapin at Long Branch
  Chincapin among the Free Lovers
  Church Militant
  Cincinnatus Sweeny
  Condensed Congress
  Colonel Fisk's Soliloquy
  Cons, by a Wrecker
  Comic Zoology
  Congressman to his Critics, A
  Consistent League, A
  Coup d'etat, My
  Correspondence Bureau
  Contemporary Sentiments
  Conversion of the "_Sun_"
  Cool, if not Comfortable
  Colored Troopa Fought Nobly, The
  Criticism of the Period
  Critical Intelligence
  Crispin _vs_. Coolie
  Current Tables
  CARTOONS--March 4, 1869--March 4, 1870
    Our Efficient Navy Department
    The Descent of the great Massachusetts Frog upon the Newspaper Flies
    The Great National Game
    Financial Belief
    The Sick Eagle
    The Financial Inquisition
    Editorial Washing Day in New York
    The New Plea for Murder
    International Yachting
    The Wedding Ring as Sorosis would like to see it
    The Blood Money
    "What I Know About Farming"
    The Wedding Ring again
    Modern Matrimony
    Yan-ki _vs_. Yankee
    The New Pandora's Box
    Lncifer's Little Game with his Royal Puppets
    Death of the "Entente Cordial"
    Wonderful Tour de Force
    The Ovation of Murder
    Law _versus_ Lawlessness
    What Will He Do With It?
    At the Saratoga Convention
    Humpty Dumpty

  D.

  Depressions for Chicago
  Delights of Dougherty, The
  Desultory Hints and Maxims for Anglers
  Distinguished Visitor, A
  Dorgs, On
  Dogs Tale, A
  Down the Bay
  Drainage under Difficulties
  Dreadful State of Things out West, The
  Dubious English
  Dwarf Dejected, The

  E.

  Earthly Paradise
  Editorial Washing Day
  Elevated Statesmanship
  England's Quandry
  Episode of Jack Horner
  Excellent Old Song Made New, An
  Excelsior

  F.

  Fable
  Ferocity of Failure, The
  Female Gentleman, The
  Fifteenth Amendment
  Finances, On the
  Fish Sauce
  Fine Arts in Philadelphia
  Fiscalities
  Fish Culture
  Fishery Question, The
  Financial
  Financial Article, Our
  Four Seasons, The
  Forty-four to Fourteen
  Foreign Correspondence
  Foam
  Free Baths, The
  From an Anxious Mother to her Daughter
  Fun and Fin

  G.

  Gay Young Joker, A
  George Francis the Ubiquitous
  Glimpses of Fortune
  Gossip in a School-house
  Good for Something Better
  Gravestones For Sale
  Grant's Blackbird pie
  Greeley's Aid to Literary Effort
  Greeley on Bailey
  Great Canal Enterprise, The
  Great African Tea Company, The
  Greek Meeting Greek

  H.

  Habits of Great Men
  Hamlet from a Rural Point
  Hall and Hayes
  H. G. and Terpsichore
  Hints for the Family
  High and Low Church
  Hints upon High Art
  Hints to Car Conductors
  Hints for Those Who Will Take Them
  Hints for the Census
  High Notes by our Musical Critic
  Hiram Green at Saratoga
  Hiram Green at the Tower of Babel
  Hiram Green on the Chinese
  Hiram Green Experience as an Editor
  Hiram Green writes to Napoleon
  Hiram Green on Jersey Musquitoes
  Hiram Green at the Female Convention
  Hiram Green on Base Ball
  Hiram Green among the Fat men
  Hiram Green to Napoleon
  Hiram Green in Wall Street
  How a Disciple of Fox Became a Lover of Bull
  Horticultural Hints
  Holy-Grail, and other Poems, The
  Homodeification
  Hyperborean

  I.

  Idiomatic Items
  Important to Publishers
  Indian, The
  Interesting to Bone Boilers
  Interior Illumination
  Indian Question, The
  Information Wanted
  Inspiration vs. Perspiration
  Items from our Rural Reporters

  J

  Joys of Summer, The
  Jottings from Washington
  Jumbles
  Jupiter Bellicosus

  K

  Kellogg Testimonials, The
  King Oakey, the First
  King Craft Looking Up

  L

  Latest from Washington
  Latest News Items
  Latest about "Lo."
  Letter from a Friend
  Letter of Advice, A
  Letter from a Japanese Student
  Letter from a Croaker, A
  Leaven of Leavenworth
  Literary Vampire
  Lines by a Hapless Swain
  Long Shot, A
  "Lot" on a Lot of Proverbs
  Love in a Boarding-House
  Lucus a non, etc

  M

  Mariner's Wrongs, The
  Marriage Market in Rome, The
  Maine Question in Massachusetts
  Marine Mixture, A
  Managers of Railroads, To
  Medical Miss, A
  Methodist Book Concern, Concerning the
  Mercantile Library Association
  Mind your P's and Q's
  Miseries of a Handsome Man
  Motley Melody, A
  Municipal Competition
  Murphy the Conqueror
  Mythology, Of
  Mystery of Mr. E. Drood.
  Mythology, Further of
  Mythology, More

  N

  National Taxidermy
  Napoleon's Latest Manifesto
  Natural Mistake, A
  New Conglomerate Pavement
  New England to New York
  New Railway Project, A
  New "Process", The
  Ninety-nine in the Shade
  Nothing like Leather
  Notary's Protest, A
  Nought for Nought
  Now We Shall Have It
  Notes from Chicago
  Now's your Chance
  Note from the Orchestra

  O

  Ode to the Missing Collector
  Old Bailey Practitioner, An
  Old Boy to the Young Ones, An
  Old Saws Re-set
  Old Iron
  Olive Logan
  Opinions of the Press
  Orange Peel, Etcetera
  Origin of the Mississippi
  Orpheus C. Kerr, Sketch of
  Organizing an Organ
  Origin of Punchinello
  O, that air!
  Our Future
  Out of the Streets
  Our Literary Legate
  Our Cuban Telegrams
  Our Explosives

  P

  Patriotic Adoration
  Pat to the Question
  Parable About the 12th of July
  Pardonable Solicitude
  Perennius AEre
  Periodical Literature
  Philadelvings
  Plays and Shows
  Please the Pigs
  Plea for Protection
  Pluckily Patriotic, Still
  Poems of the Cradle
  Popularity, Our
  Political Claptrap
  Police Report, Our
  Possible "Why" of it, The
  Portfolio, Our
  Prospectus
  Pump, The
  Punchinello's New Charter
  Punchinello in Wall Street
  Punchinello's Lyrics
  Punchinello and the Aldermen
  Punchinello on the Jury
  Punchinello Is Sorry
  Punchinello's Vacations
  Punchinello as a "Savan"

  Q

  Query

  R

  Raising Cain
  Rather Mixed
  Rather Flashy Idea, A
  Ramblings
  Real Estate of Woman, The
  Religious Amusements
  Remonstrance, A
  Religion of Temperance
  Receipe to be Tested
  Reform in Juvenile Literature
  Rejuvenated France
  Right and Left
  Robins, The
  Romaunt of the Oyster
  Rose by any other Name, A
  Roar from Niagara, A
  Romance of a Rich Young Man

  S

  Sailing Directions, &c
  Science Forever
  Seasonable Parody, A
  Several Unsavory Renderings
  Ship Ahoy!
  Sic Semper Epluribus, &c
  Sorosian Impromptu, A
  Song of the Returned Soldier
  Song of the New Babel
  Song of the Red Cloud
  Song of the Chicago Lawyer
  Song of the Mosquito
  Society, &c
  Spencerian Chaff
  Spiritual Susceptibility of Cats
  Spring Fever
  Spirit of the Navy
  Standard Literature
  Stridor Pentium
  Summer on the Catskills
  Summer at Sandy Point

  T

  Taking a Senator's Measure
  Take Care of the Wounded
  Temperance Song
  That Indian Talk
  Thiers, Idle Thiers
  Thirteenth Man in the Omnibus
  Titans
  "Tobacco Parliament" of Ohio, The
  To Our Readers
  Traveller's Tales
  Treatment for Potato Bugs
  Truly Noble
  Tutti Tremando
  Turkish Bath, My

  U

  Ulyss, To
  Umbrella, The
  Uncle Samuel
  Universockdology
  Urbs in Rure

  V

  V.H. to Punchinello
  Visit to "Sheridan's Ride"
  Voice from the Hub
  Voice of the Turtle, The
  Vultures Call, The

  W

  Wanted, a Sheriff
  War, The
  Wat Cum Snecst
  Way to Become Great, The
  Weather Prophecies for May
  Western Nomenclature
  What the Press is Expected to Say
  What I Know About Free Trade
  What I Know About Protection
  What Is It
  What Sigerson Says
  What Shall We Call It?
  Why is it so Dry?
  Woman, Past and Present
  Women's Rights Again
  Woman in Wall Street
  Woman in the Census
  Woman's Right to Ballot and Bullet
  Words and their Abases
  Wrong Mouth
  Wringer of the Future

  Y

  Y.M.C.A.

       *       *       *       *       *
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A. T. Stewart& Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         Have opened                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                     AN IMMENSE STOCK OF                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                            SILKS,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                             For                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                 STREET AND EVENING DRESSES,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       At $2 per yard,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Recently sold at $4 and $5.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A LARGE LINE OF                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                        STRIPED SILKS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                         FRESH GOODS                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    $1 to $1.50 per yard.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                    EXTRAORDINARY BARGAINS                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                              IN                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                         BLACK SILKS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                 From $1.25 per yard upward.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Plain and Plaid Poplins,                   |
  |                       Satins de Chine,                       |
  |                       Empress Cloths,                        |
  |                        Royal Velvets,                        |
  |                         Serges, etc.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    Customers, strangers, and the public are respectfully     |
  |                    requested to examine.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Streets.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      A.T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |              Have largely replenished all their              |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Popular Stocks of                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                         DRESS GOODS,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          Etc., Etc.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                       WITH GOODS WHICH                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                For Quality, Style and Prices,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                     CANNOT BE EXCELLED,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |             and respectfully request purchasers              |
  |                                                              |
  |                     To Examine the Same,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                4th Avenue, 9th and 10 Streets                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                    EXTRAORDINARY BARGAINS                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                              IN                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                           CARPETS.                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    100 Pieces Five-Frame                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ENGLISH BRUSSELS,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Reduced to $1.75 per yard.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |    200 Pieces do., Greater part Confined Styles, Reduced     |
  |                       to $2 per yard.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Very Best Quality                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                  ENGLISH TAPESTRY BRUSSELS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                       $1.30 per yard.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                       FRENCH MOQUETTES                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                             AND                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          AXMINSTERS                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    $3.50 and $4 per yard.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                        ROYAL WILTONS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |             Best Quality, $2.50 and $3 per yard.             |
  |                                                              |
  |                     CROSSLEY'S VELVETS,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |               Choice Designs, $2.50 per yard.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Superfine Ingrains, 3-Plys.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     English and Domestic                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                       OILCLOTHS, RUGS,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                         MATS, ETC.,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                   At extremely low prices                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      A.T. STEWART & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                4TH AVE., 9TH AND 10TH STREETS                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                          PUNCHINELLO.                        |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical  |
  | Weekly Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The     |
  | Press and the Public in every State and Territory of the     |
  | Union endorse it as the best paper of the kind ever          |
  | published in America.                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL.                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Subscription for one year, (with $2.00 premium,)      $4.00  |
  | "           "  six months, (without premium,)          2.00  |
  | "           "  three months, "         "               1.00  |
  | Single copies mailed free, for                          .10  |
  |                                                              |
  | We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S   |
  | CHROMOS for subscriptions as follows:                        |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year, and                            |
  |                                                              |
  | "The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo.         |
  | Size 8-3/8 by 11-1/8 ($2.00 picture,)--for            $4.00  |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $3.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | Wild Roses. 12-1/8 x 9.                                      |
  | Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.                                   |
  | Easter Morning. 6-3/4 x 10-1/4--for                   $5.00  |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $5.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | Group of Chickens;                                           |
  | Group of Ducklings;                                          |
  | Group of Quails. Each 10 x 12-1/8.                           |
  | The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14.                               |
  | The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.               |
  | Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12--for  $6.50 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $6.00 chromos:                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | The Baby in Trouble; The Unconscious Sleeper; The Two        |
  | Friends. (Dog and Child.) Each 13 x 16-3/4.                  |
  | Spring; Summer: Autumn; 12-7/8 x 16-1/8.                     |
  | The Kid's Play Ground. ll x 17-1/2--for                $7.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $7.50 chromos                                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Strawberries and Baskets.                                    |
  | Cherries and Baskets.                                        |
  | Currants. Each 13 x 18.                                      |
  | Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4.                          |
  | Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2--for    $8.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and Six American Landscapes.    |
  | (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9, price $9.00--for                   $9.00 |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of paper for one year and either of the               |
  | following $10 chromos:                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Sunset in California. (Bierstadt) 18-1/8 x 12                |
  | Easter Morning. 14 x 21.                                     |
  | Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-3/8.                        |
  | Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromos,)              |
  | 15-1/2 x 10-1/2, (companions, price $10.00 for the two),     |
  | for $10.00                                                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank   |
  | Checks on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be |
  | sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not       |
  | otherwise ordered.                                           |
  |                                                              |
  | Postage of paper is payable at the office where received,    |
  | twenty cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in         |
  | advance; the CHROMOS will be mailed free on receipt of       |
  | money.                                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be       |
  | given. For special terms address the Company.                |
  |                                                              |
  | The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of    |
  | seeing the paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A      |
  | specimen copy sent to any one desirous of canvassing or      |
  | getting up a club, on receipt of postage stamp.              |
  |                                                              |
  | Address,                                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | P.O. Box 2783.                                               |
  |                                                              |
  | No. 83 Nassau Street, New York.                              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


[Illustration: THE WIFE'S WINDFALL.

_Smith (who had forgetfully left his pocket-book on the piano, last
night.)_ "HAVE YOU FOUND ANYTHING THIS MORNING, ANGELINA?"

_Angelina._ "O! YES, DEAR, THANKS--AND I'VE ORDERED A NEW PIANO STOOL,
SOME LACE CURTAINS, AND--SUCH A LOVE OF A BONNET!"]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          "The Printing House of the United States."          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GEO. F. NESBITT & CO.,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    General JOB PRINTERS,                     |
  |                  BLANK BOOK Manufacturers,                   |
  |              STATIONERS. Wholesale and Retail.               |
  |             LITHOGRAPHIC Engravers and Printers.             |
  |             COPPER-PLATE Engravers and Printers,             |
  |                   ENVELOPE Manufacturers,                    |
  |                 FINE CUT and COLOR Printers.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |              163, 165, 167, and 169 PEARL ST.,               |
  |            73, 75, 77, and 79 FINE ST., New York.            |
  |                                                              |
  |       ADVANTAGES.--All at the same premises, and under       |
  |          immediate supervision of the proprietors.           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |               Tourists and Pleasure Travelers                |
  |                                                              |
  | will be glad to learn that that the Erie Railway Company has |
  |                           prepared                           |
  |                                                              |
  |         COMBINATION EXCURSION or Round Trip Tickets,         |
  |                                                              |
  |      Valid during the the entire season, and embracing       |
  |    Ithaca--headwaters of Cayuga Lake--Niagara Falls, Lake    |
  |   Ontario, the River St. Lawrence, Montreal, Quebec, Lake    |
  |  Champlain, Lake George, Saratoga, the White Mountains, and  |
  |  all principal points of interest in Northern New York, the  |
  |  Canadas, and New England. Also similar Tickets at reduced   |
  |  rates, through Lake Superior, enabling travelers to visit   |
  |    the celebrated Iron Mountains and Copper Mines of that    |
  | region. By applying at the Offices of the Erie Railway Co.,  |
  |    Nos. 241, 529, and 957 Broadway; 205 Chambers St.; 33     |
  | Greenwich St.; cor. 125th St. and Third Avenue, Harlem; 338  |
  |  Fulton St., Brooklyn; Depots foot of Chambers Street, and   |
  |  foot of 23rd St., New York; No. 3 Exchange Place, and Long  |
  |   Dock Depot, Jersey City, and the Agents at the principal   |
  | hotels, travelers can obtain just the Ticket they desire, as |
  |            well as all the necessary information.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  | PRANG'S LATEST PUBLICATIONS: "Wild Flowers," "Water-Lilies," |
  |                       "Chas. Dickens."                       |
  |                                                              |
  | PRANG'S CHROMOS sold in all Art Stores throughout the world. |
  |                                                              |
  | PRANG'S ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE sent free on receipt of stamp. |
  |                                                              |
  |                   L. PRANG & CO., Boston.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |   With a large and varied experience in the management and   |
  | publication of a paper of the class herewith submitted, and  |
  |  with the still more positive advantage of an Ample Capital  |
  |               to justify the undertaking, the                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |         Presents to the public for approval, the new         |
  |                                                              |
  |              ILLUSTRATED HUMOROUS AND SATIRICAL              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        WEEKLY PAPER,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of which was issued under date of April 2.  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ORIGINAL ARTICLES,                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Suitable for the paper, and Original Designs, or suggestive  |
  | ideas or sketches for illustrations, upon the topics of the  |
  |  day, are always acceptable and will be paid for liberally.  |
  |  Rejected communications cannot be returned, unless postage  |
  |                     stamps are included.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                            TERMS:                            |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy, per year, in advance ...................... $4.00  |
  |                                                              |
  |  Single copies ........................................ .10  |
  |                                                              |
  | A specimen copy will be mailed free upon the receipt of ten  |
  |                            cents.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy, with the Riverside Magazine, or any other magazine |
  |     or paper, price, $2.50, for................... $5.50     |
  |                                                              |
  |  One copy, with any magazine of paper, price $4, for  $7.00  |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |  All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 83 Nassau Street,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  P. O. Box, 2783, NEW YORK.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                  The New Burlesque Serial,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |              Written expressly for PUNCHINELLO,              |
  |                                                              |
  |                              BY                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                       OEPHEUS C. KERR,                       |
  |                                                              |
  | Commenced in No. 11, will be continued weekly throughout the |
  |                            year.                             |
  |                                                              |
  | A sketch of the eminent author, written by his bosom friend, |
  |                 with superb illustrations of                 |
  |                                                              |
  |    1ST. THE AUTHOR'S PALATIAL RESIDENCE AT BEGAD'S HILL,     |
  |                 TICKNOR'S FIELDS, NEW JERSEY                 |
  |                                                              |
  | 2D. THE AUTHOR AT THE DOOR OF SAID PALATIAL RESIDENCE, taken |
  |  as he appears "Every Saturday," will also be found in the   |
  |                         same number.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Single Copies, for Sale by all newsmen, (or mailed from this |
  |   office, free,) Ten Cents. Subscription for One Year, one   |
  |              copy, with $2 Chromo Premium, $4.               |
  |                                                              |
  |  Those desirous of receiving the paper containing this new   |
  |    serial, which promises to be the best ever written by     |
  | ORPHEUS C. KERR, should subscribe now, to insure its regular |
  |                       receipt weekly.                        |
  |                                                              |
  | We will send the first Ten Numbers of PUNCHINELLO to any one |
  |    who wishes to see them, in view of subscribing, on the    |
  |                   receipt of SIXTY CENTS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |           P. O. Box 2783. 83 Nassau St., New York            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

GEO. W. WHEAT & CO, PRINTERS, No. 8 SPRUCE STREET.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 1, No. 26, September
24, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 1, NO. 26 ***

***** This file should be named 10034.txt or 10034.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/3/10034/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


