Project Gutenberg's Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 29, October 15, 1870, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 29, October 15, 1870

Author: Various

Release Date: November 11, 2003 [EBook #10047]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 2, NO. 29 ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and PG Distributed Proofreaders





  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           CONANT'S                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PATENT BINDERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                             FOR                              |
  |                                                              |
  |  "PUNCHINELLO," to preserve the paper for binding, will be   |
  |         sent postpaid, on receipt of One Dollar, by          |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               83 Nassau Street, New York City.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      We will Mail Free                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           A COVER                            |
  |                                                              |
  |           Lettered & Stamped, with New Title Page            |
  |                                                              |
  |                         FOR BINDING                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                        FIRST VOLUME,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   On Receipt of 50 Cents,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   TITLE PAGE ALONE, FREE,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      On application to                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      83 Nassau Street.                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                  HARRISON BRADFORD & CO.'S                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                         STEEL PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  | These Pens are of a finer quality, more durable, and cheaper |
  |    than any other Pen in the market. Special attention is    |
  |  called to the following grades, as being better suited for  |
  |       business purposes than any Pen manufactured. The       |
  |                                                              |
  |            "503," "22," and the "Anti-Corrosive,"            |
  |                                                              |
  |             we recommend for Bank and Office use             |
  |                                                              |
  |                      D. APPLETON & CO.,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                Sole Agents for United States,                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


VOL II., NO. 29


PUNCHINELLO


SATURDAY, OCTOBER 15, 1870.


PUBLISHED BY THE

PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,

83 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD,

By ORPHEUS C. KERR.

Continued in this Number.


See 15th Page for Extra Premiums.


  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     Bound Volume No. 1.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |   The first volume of PUNCHINELLO-- the only first-class,    |
  |  original, illustrated, humorous and satirical weekly paper  |
  | published in this country--ending with No. 26, September 24, |
  |                            1870,                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Bound in Extra Cloth,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |          will be ready for delivery on Oct 1, 1870.          |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PRICE $2.50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | Sent postpaid to any part of the United States on receipt of |
  |                            price.                            |
  |                                                              |
  | A copy of the paper for one year, from October 1st, No. 27,  |
  | and the Bound Volume, (the latter prepaid,) will be sent to  |
  |                  any subscriber for $5.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | Three copies for one year, and three Bound Volumes, with an  |
  |  extra copy of Bound Volume, to any person sending us three  |
  |                  subscriptions for $16.50.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |     One copy of a paper for one year, with a fine chromo     |
  |                   premium, for..... $4.00                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                Single copies, mailed free .10                |
  |                                                              |
  |     Back numbers can always be supplied, as the paper is     |
  |                        electrotyped.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |           Book canvassers will find this volume a            |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Very Saleable Book.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |         Orders supplied at a very liberal discount.          |
  |                                                              |
  |    All remittances should be made in Post Office orders.     |
  |                                                              |
  |   Canvassers wanted for the paper everywhere. Send for our   |
  |                      Special Circular.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Punchinello Publishing Co.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                     83 NASSAU ST., N.Y.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                      P.O. Box No. 2783.                      |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |               APPLICATIONS FOR ADVERTISING IN                |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO"                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                       JOHN NICKINSON,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                         Room No. 4,                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                  No. 83 Nassau Street, N.Y.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       TO NEWS-DEALERS                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Punchinello's Monthly.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |              The Weekly Numbers for September,               |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Bound in a Handsome Cover,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |               Is now ready. Price Fifty Cents.               |
  |                                                              |
  |                          THE TRADE                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Supplied by the                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                    AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |           Who are now prepared to receive Orders.            |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 Bowling Green Savings-Bank,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                         33 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                           NEW YORK                           |
  |                                                              |
  |            Open Every Day from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.             |
  |                                                              |
  |             _Deposits of any sum, from Ten Cents             |
  |         to Ten Thousand Dollars, will be received._          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Six per Cent interest,                    |
  |                   Free of Government Tax.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                   INTEREST ON NEW DEPOSITS                   |
  |                                                              |
  |            Commences on the First of every Month.            |
  |                                                              |
  |                   HENRY SMITH, _President_                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                REEVES E. SELMES, _Secretary_.                |
  |                                                              |
  |        WALTER ROCHE, EDWARD HOGAN, _Vice-Presidents_.        |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         J. NICKINSON                         |
  |                                                              |
  |              begs to announce to the friends of              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        "PUNCHINELLO,"                        |
  |                                                              |
  | residing in the country, that, for their convenience, he has |
  |    made arrangements by which, on receipt of the price of    |
  |                                                              |
  |                 ANY STANDARD BOOK PUBLISHED,                 |
  |                                                              |
  |          the same will be forwarded, postage paid.           |
  |                                                              |
  |     Parties desiring Catalogues of any of our Publishing     |
  |     Houses, can have the same forwarded by inclosing two     |
  |                           stamps.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          OFFICE OF                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                      83 Nassau Street.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       [P.O. Box 2783.]                       |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 A NEW AND MUCH-NEEDED BOOK.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                          MATERNITY                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                      A POPULAR TREATISE                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                 For Young Wives and Mothers                  |
  |                                                              |
  |      BY T. S. VERDI, A. M., M. D., OF WASHINGTON, D. C.      |
  |                                                              |
  |    Dr. VERDI is a well-known and successful Homoeopathic     |
  |   Practitioner, of thorough scientific training and large    |
  | experience. His book has arisen from a want felt in his own  |
  |   practice, as a Monitor to Young Wives, a Guide to Young    |
  | Mothers, and an assistant to the family physician. It deals  |
  | skilfully, sensibly, and delicately with the perplexities of |
  |   early married life, as connected with the holy duties of   |
  | Maternity, giving information which women must have, either  |
  |  in conversation with physicians, or from such a source as   |
  |    this--evidently the preferable mode of learning, for a    |
  |  delicate and sensitive woman. Plain and intelligible, but   |
  |  without offense to the most fastidious taste, the style of  |
  |  this book must commend it to careful perusal. It treats of  |
  | the needs, dangers, and alleviations of the time of travail; |
  |  and gives extended detailed instructions for the care and   |
  | medical treatment of infants and children throughout all the |
  |                    perils of early life.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |  As a Mother's Manual, it will hare a large sale, and as a   |
  |  book of special and reliable information on very important  |
  |            topics, it will be heartily welcomed.             |
  |                                                              |
  |   Handsomely printed on laid paper: bevelled boards, extra   |
  |        English cloth, 12mo., 450 pages. Price $2.25.         |
  |                                                              |
  |  _For sale by all Booksellers, or will be sent post-paid on  |
  |                   receipt of the price by_                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                J. B. FORD & CO., Publishers,                 |
  |                    39 Park Row, New York.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       FORST & AVERELL,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |             Steam, Lithograph, and Letter Press              |
  |                                                              |
  |                          PRINTERS,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               EMBOSSERS, ENGRAVERS, AND LABEL                |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |      Sketches and Estimates furnished upon application.      |
  |                                                              |
  |           23 Platt Street, and 20-22 Gold Street,            |
  |                                                              |
  |                        P.O. Box 2845.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                           FOLEY'S                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                          GOLD PENS.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                    THE BEST AND CHEAPEST.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                        256 BROADWAY.                         |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          The only Journal of its kind in America!!           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    THE AMERICAN CHEMIST:                     |
  |                                                              |
  |  A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF THEORETICAL, ANALYTICAL AND TECHNICAL  |
  |                          CHEMISTRY.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |          DEVOTED ESPECIALLY TO AMERICAN INTERESTS.           |
  |                                                              |
  |     EDITED BY Chas. F. Chandler, Ph.D., & W.H. Chandler.     |
  |                                                              |
  |   The Proprietors and Publishers of THE AMERICAN CHEMIST,    |
  |   having purchased the subscription list and stock of the    |
  |    American reprint of the CHEMICAL NEWS, have decided to    |
  |  advance the interests of the American Chemical Science by   |
  |   the publication of a Journal which shall be a medium of    |
  |  communication for all practical, thinking, experimenting,   |
  |   and manufacturing scientific men throughout the country.   |
  |                                                              |
  |     The columns of THE AMERICAN CHEMIST are open for the     |
  | reception of original articles from any part of the country, |
  | subject to approval of the editor. Letters of inquiry on any |
  |   points of interest within the scope of the Journal will    |
  |                  receive prompt attention.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                     THE AMERICAN CHEMIST                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Is a Journal of especial interest to             |
  |                                                              |
  |    SCHOOLS AND MEN OF SCIENCE, TO COLLEGES, APOTHECARIES,    |
  |    DRUGGISTS, PHYSICIANS, ASSAYERS, DYERS, PHOTOGRAPHERS,    |
  |                        MANUFACTURERS,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |          And all concerned in scientific pursuits.           |
  |                                                              |
  |    Subscription, $5.00 per annum, in advance; 50 cts. per    |
  |               number. Specimen copies, 25 cts.               |
  |                                                              |
  |                Address WILLIAM BALDWIN & CO.,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Publishers and Proprietors,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                 434 Broome Street, New York.                 |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       WEVILL & HAMMAR,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                       Wood Engravers,                        |
  |                                                              |
  |                        208 BROADWAY,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                       GEO. B. BOWLEND,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Draughtsman & Designer                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 Fulton Street,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Room No. 11, NEW YORK.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      HENRY L. STEPHENS,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                           ARTIST,                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 160 FULTON STREET,                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                          NEW YORK.                           |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.

AN ADAPTATION.

BY ORPHEUS C. KERR.

CHAPTER XXII.--(Continued.)

When Miss POTTS and Mr. SIMPSON rejoined Mr. DIBBLE, in the office of
the latter, across the street, it was decided that the flighty young
girl should be made less expensive to her friends by temporary
accommodation in an economical boarding-house, and that the Gospeler,
returning to Bumsteadville, should persuade Miss CAROWTHERS to come and
stay with her until the time for the reopening of the Macassar Female
College.

Subsequently, with his homeless ward upon his arm, the benignant old
lawyer underwent a series of scathing rebuffs from the various
high-strung descendants of better days at whose once luxurious but now
darkened homes he applied for the desired board. Time after time was he
reminded, by unspeakably majestic middle-aged ladies with bass voices,
that when a fine old family loses its former wealth by those
vicissitudes of fortune which bring out the noblest traits of character
and compel the letting-out of a few damp rooms, it is significant of a
weak understanding, or a depraved disrespect of the dignity of
adversity, to expect that such families shall lose money and lower their
hereditary high tone by waiting upon a parcel of young girls. A few
Single Gentlemen desiring all the comforts of a home would not be
considered insulting unless they objected to the butter, and a couple of
married Childless Gentlemen with their wives might be pardoned for
respectfully applying; but the idea of a parcel of young girls! Wherever
he went, the reproach of not being a few Single Gentlemen, or a, couple
of married Childless Gentlemen with their wives, abashed Mr. DIBBLE into
helpless retreat; while FLORA'S increasing guilty consciousness of the
implacable sentiment against her as a parcel of young girls, culminated
at last in tears. Finally, when the miserable lawyer was beginning to
think strongly of the House of the Good Shepherd, or the Orphan Asylum,
as a last resort, it suddenly occurred to him that Mrs. SKAMMERHORN, a
distant widowed aunt of his clerk, Mr. BLADAMS, had been known to live
upon boarders in Bleecker Street; and thither he dragged hastily the
despised object on his arm.

Being a widow without children, and relieved of nearly all the
weaknesses of her sex by the systematic refusal of the opposite sex to
give her any encouragement in them, Mrs. SKAMMERHORN was a relentless
advocate of Woman's Inalienable Rights, and only wished that Man could
just see himself in that contemptible light in which he was distinctly
visible to One who, sooner than be his Legal Slave, would never again
accompany him to the Altar.

"I tell you candidly, DIBBLE," said she, in answer to his application,
"that if you had applied to be taken yourself, I should have said
'Never!' and at once called in the police. Since SKAMMERHORN died
delirious, I have always refused to have his sex in the house, and I
tell you, frankly, that I consider it hardly human. If this girl of
yours, however, and the elderly female whom, you say, she expects to
join her in a few days, will make themselves generally useful about the
house, and try to be companions to me, I can give them the very room
where SKAMMERHORN died."

Perceiving that FLORA turned pale, her guardian whispered to her that
she would not be alone in the room, at any rate; and then respectfully
asked whether the late Mr. SKAMMERHORN had ever been seen around the
house since his death?

"To be frank with you," answered the widow, "I did think that I came
upon him once in the closet, with his back to me, as often I'd seen the
weak creature in life going after a bottle on the top shelf. But it was
only his coat hanging there, with his boots standing below and my muff
hanging over to look like his head."

"You think, then," said Mr. DIBBLE, inquiringly, "that it is such a room
as two ladies could occupy, without awaking at midnight with a strange
sensation and thinking they felt a supernatural presence?"

"Not if the bed was rightly searched beforehand, and all the joints well
peppered with magnetic powder," was the assuring answer.

"Could we see the room, madam?"

"If the shutters were open you could; as they're not;" returned the
widow, not offering to stir; "but ever since SKAMMERHORN, starting up
with a howl, said 'Here he comes again, red-hot!' and tried to jump out
of the window, I've never opened them for any single man, and never
shall. I couldn't bear it, DIBBLE, to see one of your sex in that room
again, and hope you will not insist."

Broken in spirit as he was by preceding humiliations, the old lawyer had
not the heart to contest the point, and it was agreed, that, upon the
arrival of Miss CAROWTHERS from Bumsteadville, she and FLORA should
accept the memorable room in question.

Upon their way back to the hotel, guardian and ward met Mr. BENTHAM,
who, from the moment of becoming a character in their Story, had been
possessed with that mysterious madness for open-air exercise which
afflicted every acquaintance of the late EDWIN DROOD, and now saluted
them in the broiling street and solemnly besought their company for a
long walk. "It has occurred to me," said the Comic Paper man, who had
resumed his black worsted gloves, "that Mr. DIBBLE and Miss POTTS may be
willing to aid me in walking-off some of the darker suicidal
inclinations incident to first-class Humorous Journalism in America.
Reading the 'proof' of an instalment of a comic serial now publishing in
my paper, I contracted such gloom, that a frantic rush into the fresh
air was my only hope of on escape from self-destruction. Let us walk,
if you please."

Led on, in the profoundest melancholy, by this chastened character, Mr.
DIBBLE and the Flowerpot were presently toiling hotly through a
succession of grievous side-streets, and forlorn short-cuts to dismal
ferries; the state of their conductor's spirits inclining him to find a
certain refreshingly solemn joy in the horrors of pedestrianism imposed
by obstructions of merchandise on side-walks, and repeated climbings
over skids extending from store doors to drays. Inspired to an
extraordinary flow of malignant animal spirits by the complexities of
travel incident to the odorous mazes of some hundred odd kegs of salt
mackerel and boxes of brown soap impressively stacked before one very
enterprising Commission house, Mr. BENTHAM lightened the journey with
anecdotes of self-made Commission men who had risen in life by breaking
human legs and city ordinances; and dwelt emotionally upon the scenes in
the city hospitals where ladies and gentlemen were brought in, with
nails from the hoops of sugar-hogsheads sticking into their feet, or
limbs dislocated from too-loftily piled firkins of butter falling upon
them. Through incredible hardships, and amongst astounding complications
of horse-cars, target companies, and barrels of everything, Mr. BENTHAM
also amused his friends with circuits of several of the fine public
markets of New York; explaining to them the relations of the various
miasmatic smells of those quaint edifices with the various devastating
diseases of the day, and expatiating quite eloquently upon the political
corruption involved in the renting of the stalls, and the fine openings
there were for Cholera and Yellow Fever in the Fish and Vegetable
departments. Then, as a last treat, he led his panting companions
through several lively up-hill blocks of drug-mills and tobacco firms,
to where they had a distant view of a tenement house next door to a
kerosene factory, where, as he vivaciously told them, in the event of a
fire, at least one hundred human beings would be slowly done to a turn.
After which all three returned from their walk, firmly convinced that an
unctuous vein of humor had been conscientiously worked, and abstractedly
wishing themselves dead.[1]

The exhilarating effect of the genial Comic Paper man upon FLORA did
not, indeed, pass away, until she and Miss CAROWTHERS were in their
appointed quarters under the roof of Mrs. SKAMMERHORN, whither they went
immediately upon the arrival of the elder spinster from Bumsteadville.

"It could have been wished, my good woman," said Miss CAROWTHERS,
casting a rather disparaging look around the death-chamber of the late
Mr. SKAMMERHORN, "that you had assigned to educated single young ladies,
like ourselves, an apartment less suggestive of Man in his wedded
aspects. The spectacle of a pair of pegged boots sticking out from under
a bed, and a razor and a hone grouped on the mantle-shelf, is not such
as I should desire to encourage in the dormitory of a pupil under my
tuition."

"That's much to be deplored, I'm sure, CAROWTHERS," returned Mrs.
SKAMMERHORN, severely, "and sorry am I that I ever married, on that
particular account. I'd not have done it, if you'd only told me. But,
seeing that I married SKAMMERHORN, and then he died delirious, his
boots and razor must remain, just as he often wished to throw the
former at me in his ravings. Once married is enough, say I; and those
who never were, through having no proposals, must bear with those who
have, and take things as they come."

"There are those, I'd have you know, Mrs. SKAMMERHORN, to whom proposals
have been no inducement," said Miss CAROWTHERS, sharply; "or, if being
made, and then withdrawn, have given our sex opportunities to prove, in
courts of law, that damages can still be got. I'm afraid of no Man, my
good woman, as a person named BLODGETT once learned from a jury; but
boots and razors are not what I would have familiar to the mind of one
who never had a husband to die in raging torments, nor yet has sued for
breach."

"Miss POTTS is but a chicken, I'll admit," retorted Mrs. SKAMMERHORN;
"but you're not such, CAROWTHERS, by many a good year. On the contrary,
quite a hen. Then, you being with her, if the boots and razor make her
think she sees that poor, weak SKAMMERHORN a-ranging round the room,
when in his grave it is his place to be, you've only got to say: 'A fool
you are, and always were,'--as often I, myself, called at him in his
lifetime,--and off he'll go into his tomb again for fear of
broomsticks."

"FLORA, my dear," said Miss CAROWTHERS, turning with dignity to her
pupil, "if I know anything of human nature, the man who has once got
away from here, will stay away. Only single ghosts have attachments for
the houses in which they once lived. So, never mind the boots and razor,
darling; which, after all, if seen by peddlers, or men who come to fix
the gas, might keep us safe from robbers."

"As safe as any man himself, young woman, with pistols under his head
that he would never dare to fire if robbers were no more than cats
rampaging," added Mrs. SKAMMERHORN, enthusiastically. "With nothing but
an old black hat of SKAMMERHORN'S, and walking-cane, kept hanging in the
hall, I haven't lost a spoon by tramps or census takers for six mortal
years. So, make yourselves at home, I beg you both, while I go down and
cook the liver for our dinner. You'll find it tender as a chicken, after
what you've broke your teeth upon in boarding-schools; though
SKAMMERHORN declared it made him bilious in the second year, forgetting
what he'd drank with sugar to his taste, beforehand."

Thus was sweet FLORA POTTS introduced to her new home; where, but for
looking down from her windows at the fashions, making-up hundreds of
bows of ribbons for her neck, and making-over all her dresses, her
woman's mind must have been a blank. What time Miss CAROWTHERS told her
all day how she looked in this or that style of wearing her hair, and
read her to sleep each night with extracts from the pages of cheery
HANNAH MORE. As for the object nearest her young heart, to say that she
was wholly unruffled by it would be inaccurate; but by address she kept
it hidden from all eyes save her own.

[Footnote 1: Ordinary readers, while admiring the heavy humor of this
unexpected open-air episode, may wonder what on earth it has to do with
the the Story; but the cultivated few, understanding the ingenious
mechanics of novel-writing, will appreciate it as a most skilful and
happy device to cover the interval between the hiring of Mrs.
SKAMMERHORN's room, and the occupation thereof by FLORA and her late
teacher--another instance of what our profoundly critical American
journals call "artistic--elaboration." (See corresponding Chapter of
the original English Story.)]


CHAPTER XXIII.

GOING HOME IN THE MORNING.

After having thrown all his Ritualistic friends at home into a most
unholy and exasperated condition of mind, by a steady series of vague
remarks as to the extreme likelihood of their united implication in the
possible deed of darkness by which he has lost a broadcloth nephew and
an alpaca umbrella, the mournful Mr. BUMSTEAD is once more awaiting the
dawn in that popular retreat in Mulberry Street where he first
contracted his taste for cloves. The Assistant-Assessor and the Alderman
of the Ward are again there, tilted back against the wall in their
chairs; their shares in the Congressional Nominating Convention held in
that room earlier in the night having left them too weary for further
locomotion. The decanters and tumblers hurled by the Nominating
Convention over the question of which Irishman could drink the most to
be nominated, are still scattered about the floor; here and there a
forgotten slungshot marks the places where rival delegations have
confidently presented their claims for recognition; and a few
bullet-holes in the wall above the bar enumerate the various pauses in
the great debate upon the perils of the public peace from Negro
Suffrage.

Reclining with great ease of attitude upon an uncushioned settee, the
Ritualistic organist is aroused from dreamy slumber by the turning-over
of the pipe in his mouth, and majestically motions for the venerable
woman of the house to come and brush the ashes from his clothes.

"Wud yez have it filled again, honey?" asks the woman. "Sure, wan pipe
more would do ye no harrum."

"I'mtooshleepy," he says, dropping the pipe.

"An' are yez too shlapey, asthore, to talk a little bissiness wid an
ould woman?" she asks, insinuatingly. "Couldn't yez be afther payin' me
the bit av a schore I've got agin ye?"

Mr. BUMSTEAD opens his eyes reproachfully, and wishes to know how she
can dare talk about money matters to an organist who, at almost any
moment, may be obliged to see a Chinaman hired in his place on account
of cheapness?

"Could the haythen crayture play, thin?" she asks, wonderingly.

"Thairvairimitative," he tells her;--"Cookwashiron' n' eatbirdsnests."

"An' vote would they, honey?"

"Yesh--'f course--thairvairimitative, I tell y'," snarls he:
"do'tcheapzdirt."

"Is it vote chaper they would, the haythen naygurs, than daycint,
hardworkin' white min?" she asks, excitedly.

"Yesh. Chinesecheaplabor," he says, bitterly.

"Och, hone!" cries the woman, in anguish; "and f'hat's the poor to do
then, honey?"

"Gowest; go'nfarm!" sobs Mr. BUMSTEAD, shedding tears. "I'd go m'self if
a-hadn't lost dear-er-rerelative.--Nephew'n' umbrella."

"Saint PAYTHER! an' f'hat's that?"

"EDWINS!" cries the unhappy organist, starting to his feet with a wild
reel. "Th' pride of'suncle'sheart! I see 'm now,
in'sh'fectionatemanhood, with whalebone ribs, made 'f alpaca,
andyetsoyoung. 'Help me!' hiccries; 'PENDRAGON'sash'nate'n me!'
hiccries--and I go!"

While uttering this extraordinary burst of feeling, he has advanced
towards the door in a kind of demoniac can-can, and, at its close,
abruptly darts into the street and frantically makes off.

"The cross of the holy fathers!" ejaculates the woman, momentarily
bewildered by this sudden termination of the scene. Then a new
expression comes swiftly over her face, and she adds, in a different
tone, "Odether-nodether, but it's coonin' as a fox he is, and it's off
he's gone again widout payin' me the schore! Sure, but I'll follow him,
if it's to the wurruld's ind, and see f'hat he is and where he is."

Thus it happens that she reaches Bumsteadville almost as soon as the
Ritualistic organist, and, following him to his boarding-house,
encounters Mr. TRACEY CLEWS upon the steps.

"Well, now!" calls that gentleman, as she looks inquiringly at him, "who
do you want?"

"Him as just passed in, your Honor."

"Mr. BUMSTEAD?"

"Ah. Where does he play the organ?"

"In St. Cow's Church, down yonder. Mass at seven o'clock, and he'll be
there in half an hour."

"It's there I'll be, thin," mumbles the woman; "and bad luck to it that
I didn't know before; whin I came to ax him for me schore, and might
have gone home widout a cint but for a good lad named EDDY who gave me a
sthamp.--The same EDDY, I'm thinkin', that I've heard him mutter about
in his shlape at my shebang in town, whin he came there on political
business."

After a start and a pause, Mr. CLEWS repeats his information concerning
the Ritualistic church, and then cautiously follows the woman as she
goes thither.

Unconscious of the remarkable female figure intently watching him from
under a corner of the gallery, and occasionally shaking a fist at him,
Mr. BUMSTEAD attends to the musical part of the service with as much
artistic accuracy as a hasty head-bath and a glass of soda-water are
capable of securing. The worshippers are too busy with risings,
kneelings, bowings, and miscellaneous devout gymnastics, to heed his
casual imperfections, and his headache makes him fiercely indifferent to
what any one else may think.

Coming out of the athletic edifice, Mr. CLEWS comes upon the woman
again, who seems excited.

"Well?" he says.

"Sure he saw me in time to shlip out of a back dure," she returns,
savagely; "but it's shtrait to his boording-house I'm going afther him,
the spalpeen."

Again Mr. TRACEY CLEWS follows her; but this time he allows her to go up
to Mr. BUMSTEAD'S room, while he turns into his own apartment where his
breakfast awaits him. "I can make a chalk mark for the trail I've struck
to-day," he says; and then thoughtfully attacks the meal upon the
table.[2]

(_To be Continued._)


[Footnote 2: At this point, the English original of this Adaptation--the
"Mystery of EDWIN DROOD"--breaks off forever.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PLAYS AND SHOWS.

Nilsson has come; and, sad to say, has brought dissension and discord
with her. Not that there is any discord in her matchless voice, but
there is a vast amount of wrangling as to her precise merits. Do you
doubt this? Then come with me in my light Fourth Avenue car, while the
stars are bright and the sky is blue, (this is an adaptation of a once
popular love-song by Dr. WATTS,) and we will go to Steinway Hall to hear
the Improved Swedish Nightingale, and feast our eyes on STRAKOSCH'S
flowers.

We pass up the steep staircase--with many misgivings as to our ankles,
if we belong to the sex which considers the possession of those
anatomical features a fact to be carefully concealed, provided they are
not symmetrical. We pass the door-keeper, who, as is the custom of his
kind, frowns malignantly at us, and evidently asks himself--"How much
longer can I refrain from tearing up the tickets of these impudent
pleasure-seekers, and throwing the pieces in their infamously contented
countenances?" We gain the hall, and are sent to the inevitable "other
aisle," by the usher, (by the way, why is it that one always gets into
the wrong aisle, only to be ignominiously ordered to the opposite side
of the house?) and we finally turn various illegal occupants out of our
seats, and begin to fan ourselves in fervid anticipation of the coming
musical treat. A buzz of conversation is everywhere going on. Did any
one ever notice the curious fact that a middle-aged man and woman can
converse at a theatre or concert room without either one finding any
difficulty in hearing what the other says, while no young man can make
his accompanying young lady hear a single word unless his mouth is in
close proximity to her ear? This singular state of things is doubtless
due to the peculiar acoustical properties of public buildings. We
manage, however, to hear a good deal of both young and middle-aged
conversation, of the following improving type.

RURAL PERSON. "I've heard most everybody that's sung in our Philadelphy
opera house, and some of 'em are pretty hard to beat. NILSSON may beat
'em, you know. Mind, now, I don't say she won't, but she's got a mighty
hard row to hoe."

CRITIC. _(Who sent for seats for his eight sisters and their
friends--but who did not get them.)_ "There comes the Scandinavian
Society--fifty Irishmen at fifty cents a head. Did you see the flowers
piled up in the lobby? MAX paid seven hundred dollars for the lot."

YOUNG MAN. "Dearest! I wish you wouldn't look at that fellow across the
way. You know how your own darling loves you, and--"

YOUNG LADY. "Hush! Don't bother. Here comes VIEUXTEMPS."

VIEUXTEMPS plays, and the audience listens with the air of people who
are dreadfully bored, but are afraid to show it. He disappears with an
amount of applause carefully graduated so as to express enthusiasm
without the desire for hearing him again. The Rural Person remarks that
"he doesn't think much of fiddlers anyhow. Give him a trombone, or a
banjo, for his money."

MR. WEHLI then trifles with the piano. Him, too, the audience politely
endure, but plainly do not appreciate. They have come to hear NILSSON,
and feel outraged at having to hear anybody else. A cornet solo by the
Angel GABRIEL himself would be secretly regarded as undoubtedly
artistic, but certainly a little out of place.

CHORUS OF RIVAL PIANO-MAKERS. "What a wretched instrument that poor
fellow is made to play upon. Nobody can produce any effect on a STEINWAY
piano. It's good for nothing but for boarding-school practice."

CRITIC, (who knows Mr. STEINWAY.) "Anybody can please people by playing
on a STEINWAY. I defy WEHLI or any other man to play badly on such a
superb instrument as that."

YOUNG MAN. "Dearest! Do you remember the day when you gave me one of
your hair-pins? I have worn it next my--"

YOUNG LADY. "Oh, don't bother. NILSSON is just going to sing."

And she does sing, with that voice so matchless in its perfect purity,
that even the disappointed critic grows uneasy as he tries in vain to
find some reasonable fault with it. She ceases, and amid wild cheers
from the paying part of the audience, silent approval from the
deadheads, and shouts of "Hooroo!" and "Begorra!" from the Scandinavian
Society, MAX'S flowers are brought in solemn procession up the aisle,
and laid at the feet of the Improved Nightingale.

CRITIC. "Those flowers will just be taken out of the back door, and
brought in again to be used the second time. There's a hand-cart waiting
for them now, at the Fifteenth Street entrance."

SIX PRIME DONNE, _(who were not asked to sing at the NILSSON concerts.)_
"Well, did you ever hear 'Angels Ever Bright' sung in a more atrocious
style? If that is NILSSON's idea of expression, the sooner she leaves
the stage to artists, the better."

CYNICAL OLD MUSICIAN. "Bah! NILSSON infuses religious sentiment into her
singing, and these envious creatures don't know what religious sentiment
is, so they think she is all wrong. If she had sung HANDEL with a smile,
and a coquettish tossing of her head, they would still have hated her,
but they would not have ventured to call her "inartistic.""

YOUNG MAN. "Darling! I had rather hear your sweet voice, than listen to
NILSSON or a choir of angels for the rest of my--"

YOUNG LADY. "CHARLES, you will drive me wild, with your intolerable
spooniness. I'll never come out with you again. See how the SMITH girls
are looking at you."

RURAL PERSON. "--So I says to the usher, 'If you think I'm a countryman
who don't know what's what, you're everlastingly sold.' 'I'm from
Philadelphy,' says I, 'and we've got singers there that can knock spots
out of your NILLOGGS and KELSONS and the rest of 'em.' So he just--"

RIVAL MANAGER. "My tear fellow, you shust mind dis. MAX vill lose all
his monish. NILSSON can't sing, my tear! She vanted me to encage her a
year ago, but I vouldn't do it. Dere ish no monish in her, now you mind
vot I says."

DISTINGUISHED TEACHER. "You call her an artist! Why, look here, if one
of my scholars were to phrase as wretchedly as she does, I'd never show
my face in public again. Her voice is so-so, but her school is simply
infamous."

CELEBRATED TEACHER. "Well, I don't mind saying that I never heard her
equal in point of quality of voice. She gives you pure tone, which is
what hardly any other singer does."

NINE TENTHS OF THE AUDIENCE. "She is perfectly lovely. There never was
anybody like her."

CONNOISSEUR, _(who really does know something about music, but who
actually has no prejudices.)_ "Her voice is such a one as MARGARET must
have had when she sang by her spinning-wheel, before fate threw her in
the way of FAUST. And these professional musicians will tear her
reputation to pieces among themselves! Why should musical people be, of
all others, most fond of discord?"

CRITIC. "There! those fools are determined to make her sing again. I
can't stand this. I'll see MAX once more, and if he don't do the right
thing, I'll say that NILSSON was played out in Europe before she came
here, and that she is a complete failure."

YOUNG MAN, "Sweetest! may I ask you one question?"

YOUNG LADY. "No, you shan't. Will you keep quiet? Everybody is looking
at you."

EVERYBODY. "Sh! sh! sh!"

NILSSON sings again. As her delicious notes die out in the thunder of
applause, I make my way out of the Hall, into the clear and silent
night. For not even the witchery of VIEUXTEMPS'S violin is fit to mate
in memory with the peerless tones of NILSSON.

Here I meant to do some fine writing, but as this is PUNCHINELLO, and
not the "Easy Chair" of Harper's Magazine, I conquer the temptation.
Wherefore I accept the gratitude of my readers, and sign myself

MATADOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

Congestion at "The Sun."

PUNCHINELLO is pained to know that the circulation of his bewitching
contemporary, _The Sun_, is daily growing more and more languid.
Paralysis has set in, and the patient but seldom has the energy to
dictate the daily bulletin giving the state of his circulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Only a Suggestion.

It will be bad enough for the Prussian Cavalrymen to water their horses
in the Seine, but if they go to driving their stakes in the Bois de
Boulogne, won't the Parisians think it looks a little like running
things into the ground?

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR MASTERS OF ART.

MR. PUNCHINELLO: The knights of the pencil and easel, having returned
from their usual visits to their summer haunts, and having exchanged the
blue skies and grassy vales of Nature for the smoky ceilings and dirty
floors of Art, (I believe that is the proper way to commence this kind
of an article,) your correspondent has visited a number of them, and has
obtained authentic accounts of their present occupations, and has also
been permitted to make slight sketches of some of their principal works.

BIERSTADT, as usual, is painting Yos. Having entirely exhausted the Yo
Semite, he is now at work on a grand picture of a Southdown Ewe, and
will soon commence a view of his studio,--at sunrise. He well deserves
his title of the Yeoman of Art.

JAMES HAMILTON, of Philadelphia, is painting a sunset. It may not be
generally known, but it is a fact, that he paints the sun every time it
sets. The following sketch will give a good idea of his next great
picture. The nails are inserted in the sun to keep it from going down
any further, and spoiling the scene.

[Illustration]

WILLIAM T. RICHARDS, of the same city, is hard at work on a picture
which is intended to represent, to the life, water in motion; a
specialty which he has lately adopted. It is entitled "A Scene on the
Barbary Coast; Water in Motion, Steamer in the Distance." The subjoined
sketch represents the general plan of the picture.

[Illustration]

Still another Philadelphia artist, Mr. ROTHERMEL, is very busy at a
great work. He is putting the finishing-touches to his vast painting of
the Battle of Gettysburg. On this enormous canvas may be seen correct
likenesses of all the principal generals, colonels, captains, majors,
first and second lieutenants, sergeant-majors, sergeants, corporals and
high privates who were engaged in that battle; and by the consummate
skill of the artist, each one of them, to the great gratification of
himself and his family, is placed prominently in the foreground. Such
distinguished success should meet appropriate reward, and it is now
rumored that the artist will soon be commissioned by Congress to paint
for the Rotunda of the Capitol a grand picture of our late civil war,
with all the incidents of that struggle, upon one canvas.

Of the artists who affect the "shaded wood," we learn that Mr. HENNESSY,
now absent in Europe, is drawing another "Booth." Whether this is
intended particularly for "Every Saturday," I cannot say, but I suppose
it will answer for any other week-day. At any rate, here is his last
"Booth."

[Illustration]

NAST is at work on a series of sarcastic pictures illustrating the
miseries of France. Most of them show how LOUIS NAPOLEON ought to finish
up his career and dynasty. In fact, should this gifted artist ever
travel among Bonapartists, he will certainly be hunted down in an
astounding manner, and the populace, adopting American customs, will
probably congregate to see him astride a rail. Two of his smaller
studies are very interesting. One of them, called "An Astray," is simply
a ray of black light; and another, intended for the contemplation of
persons who desire light and airy pictures, is simply a portrait of
himself, entitled "A Nasturtium."

The well-known Miss EDMONIA LEWIS has been exhibiting her statue of
"HAGAR," in Chicago. As HAGAR was the first woman who suffered anything
like divorce, Chicago is a capital place for her statue, and Miss LEWIS
evidently knows what she is about. Her name reminds me that our great
landscapist, LEWIS, is at work on a picture which he calls "A Scene in
France after a Reign." This little sketch will give an idea of the
painting.

[Illustration]

Most of our other artists are also worthily engaged, but time, (I
believe that is the regular way to end an article of this kind) will not
permit present mention of them.

EFARES.

       *       *       *       *       *

HAM AND EGGS.

War always brings with it its signs and portents. A hen somewhere in
Virginia, according to a local paper, has lately produced an egg on the
white of which the word "War" was plainly written in black letters. Now,
when we consider that the career of LOUIS NAPOLEON was more or less
influenced by Ham, there is something very significant in the advent of
this providential egg; nor should we be surprised to learn, ere long,
that the same hen had laid another egg, this time with a Prussian yolk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eheu! Strasbourg.

Reading an old traveller's description of the famous Cathedral of
Strasbourg, we note that he dwells particularly on its "fretted
windows."

Ah! yes. They have much to fret about, now, have these old windows; and
that makes us think whether the _larmiers_ of the roof over them do not
run real tears.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lo" Cunning.

The cunning of the red Indian of the Plains.

       *       *       *       *       *

PETTICOAT GOVERNMENT.

A gaunt, tall, spectacled creature, gender feminine, number singular,
person first, case always possessive, that's the standard bearer; a
broomstick from the top of which floats a petticoat, that's the
standard. Under that standard march in the U.S. at least 20,000,000
feminines, and--horrible to relate--gal children are on the increase.

Certainly the devil must have invented petticoats. After EVE had
finished up that little apple job, she went into the petticoat business,
and--hence all our tears. Instantly petticoat government became a
possibility. Then, as her daughters became wiser, they invented the
weeping business, the swooning business, and the curtain lecture
business; they went for our pocket-books and they got them, and
petticoat government became a probability. Not satisfied with the
pocket-books, they are now going for the business by means of which we
fill the books, and oh, what a hankering they have for public pap! They
stick to the curtain lecture business, but now they do it before the
curtain. Alas, petticoat government is now a certainty!

It's all very well for you to talk about the grandeur of the governments
of BOADICEA, and ELIZABETH and CATHERINE, but I don't believe that BOA,
or LIZZY, or KATE would have been very nice as a companion, if she and
you were sitting before the fire, and she wanted stamps and was going
for them as a matter of business. Besides, there was only one of them at
a time, and they didn't trouble common people much, but in this
enlightened nineteenth century I have seen a poor, miserable, six foot
dry-goods clerk turned out of a retail store by a strapping little
female, who couldn't jump a counter worth shucks. I have seen him in his
misery industriously study "What I Know About Farming," squat on a farm
in the West, and bring himself, his wife, and four miserable offshoots
to the alms-house by endeavoring to apply the rules set down in "What I
Know About Farming" to 160 acres of land. I have seen the poor,
half-paid type-setters strike for their altars, their sires, and more
wages, and I have seen a troop of petticoats, with gal children inside
them, trot into the type-setter's place, so that the miserable
compositors were compelled to return and starve on four or five dollars
a day. That's petticoat government with a vengeance. Putting your nose
to the grindstone isn't nice at any time, but it's awful when the gal
children turn.

But that is only the beginning. They have struck for bigger things. In
the expressive language of the immortal JOHNNY MILTON, they are going
for the whole hog. They want to vote; some of them have been caught
repeating already; they want to sit on juries, and they want to go to
Congress. Heaven forbid that any of them should ever reach the House of
Representatives! Imagine the size of the _Congressional Globe_ if we
should send women there! Why, there would be as great a dearth of paper
in Washington as there is now in Paris. They want to shave you, dress
you, doctor you into your coffins, preach a funeral discourse over your
remains, and then take your will into the Surrogate's Court and fight
over the little property they have left you.

They say all this means that they are our equals, and intend to show it.
Listen. In a town some hundreds of miles distant there is a law firm
whose sign reads thus:

  MRS. SMITH _and husband_.

Shades of our forefathers! Ghost of BLUEBEARD! Spirit of HENRY VIII! can
this thing be? Imagine old LABAN'S daughter starting in business, and
hanging out a sign something like this:

  +-------------------------------------------+
  |                                           |
  |          MRS. JACOB _and husband,         |
  |    Having large orders from the West_,    |
  |              SOLICIT CUSTOM.              |
  | N.B.--Gentlemen attended to by Mr. JACOB. |
  |         _The Original Mrs_. JACOB.        |
  |                                           |
  +-------------------------------------------+

Don't you suppose that JACOB, if he had found that sign over his
doorstep, would have raised a row, and if he had been overcome, don't
you suppose he would have wondered what he served those seven years for?

Oh, young man, sitting by the side of that dainty damsel, looking so
spoonily into her deep blue eyes, playing so daintily with her golden
curls, sucking honey so frequently from her ruby lips, beware! _beware!_
BEWARE! Remember, when she wants stamps, you can't put her off as your
pa did your ma. You can't say, "Business is awful dull," because she'll
do the business, and make you her book-keeper or porter or something of
that sort

Petticoat government is all very well for those who like it. Some men go
through life playing a sort of insane tag, in which, first their
mothers' petticoats, and then their wives', are hunk, and they never
leave hunk. As for me, give me trouser government, or give me a first
class funeral procession with me for the corpse.

Brethren, listen! Give me your ears! (the big ones first.) This thing
must be stopped _now_. Let us form an association for the suppression of
women, or a society for the prevention of cruelty to men. There is but
one way to cure this thing. Far out on the Western prairies dwells the
only sensible man on this continent. In the city ruled by him a man may
come home as tired as gin can make him, and his wife opens not her
mouth; he may jump over as many counters as he pleases, and none of his
wives will desire to go and do likewise. There she is the weaker vessel,
and it takes so many of her to equal one man, that she is kept in a
proper state of subjection. That's the secret; marry her a good deal.
The old maids are the ones who start the rows. Let them all be married
to some one man of a peaceable, loving, quiet disposition--say WENDELL
PHILLIPS. Let the President, if necessary, issue his proclamation making
the United States one vast Utah, and let us all be Young.

LOT.

       *       *       *       *       *

RAMBLINGS.

BY MOSE SKINNER.

MR. PUNCHINELLO: If I should tell you that I particularly excelled in
writing verses you'd hardly believe me. But such is the fact. I've sent
poem after poem to all the first-class magazines in the country, which,
if they'd been published, would have enabled me to pay my debts, and
start new accounts from Maine to Georgia. But they've never been
published--and why? It's jealousy. A child with half an eye can see
that. Those boss poets who get the big salaries, probably see my verses,
and pay the publishers a big price not to print 'em.

How little the public know of the inside workings of these things!

I'm disgusted with this trickery, and am going to shut right down on the
whole thing. Oh! they may howl, but not another line do they get!

I'm going into the song business. That's something that isn't overdone.
I composed a perfect little gem lately. It is called "Lines on the death
of a child." I chose this subject because it is comparatively new. A few
have attempted it, but they betray a crudeness and lack of pathos
painful to witness.

Whether I have supplied that deficiency or not is for the public, not
me, to judge. But if the public, or any other man, be he male or female,
thinks that by ribaldry and derision I can be induced to publish the
whole of this work before it's copyrighted, they're mistaken. The salt
that's going on the tail of this particular fowl ain't ripe yet.

It's going to be set to music and it'll probably hatch a song. I called
on a publisher last week about it.

"Don't you think," said I, "that it'll take 'em by storm?"

"Worse than that," he replied. "It's a reg'lar _line_ gale."

I knew he'd be enthusiastic about it.

He said he hadn't got any notes in, that would fit it just then, but be
expected a lot in the next steamer, and I could have my choice. He was
very polite, and I thanked him kindly.

Jealous as I am of my reputation, I am willing to stake it on this poem.
A man don't collect the obituary notices of one hundred infants and boil
'em down over a slow fire without something to be proud of, you know.

Here is a sample of it:

    LINES ON THE DEATH OF A CHILD.

       "Tell me, dear mother,
    Hast the swallows homeward flode
          When the clock strikes nine?
          Does our WILLIE'S spirit roam
               In that home
            Beyond the skies,
              Along with LIZE?
                Say, mother
                    Say--"

The other verses are, if anything, better than this. If you are anxious
to publish this poem entire, why not leave out the pictures and all the
reading matter from PUNCHINELLO for two weeks, and show the public what
genius, brains, and ability can accomplish, unaided? If you publish it
in detachments, it weakens it, you see. If the verses can't lean against
each other, they pine away immediately.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE YOUNG DEMOC TRYING TO PUT THE BIG SACHEM'S PIPE OUT.

_Big Sachem_. "SAY, YOUNG MAN, AIN'T YOU AFRAID YOU'LL BURN YOUR
BREECHES?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

SARSFIELD YOUNG HAS HIS HEAD EXAMINED.

DEAR PUNCHINELLO:--The last time I visited a barber's shop I wanted my
hair trimmed. Being in somewhat of a hurry for the train, I told the
proprietor to cut it short. As a matter of course, I was left. As for my
hair, there was precious little of that left, though. Science was too
much for it. A hand-glass, brought to bear upon a mirror, opened up a
perspective of pretty much all the back country belonging to my skull,
that is seldom equalled outside the State Prison or the Prize Ring.

I was indignant. I was so mad that my hair stood on end--voluntarily.
The barber talked soothingly of making a discount on the bill; and I,
looking at it in a strictly diplomatic light, gradually permitted myself
to grow calmer. He went further, and did the handsome thing by me--as if
it wasn't enough to cut under his price! A phrenologist by profession,
so he said, he had resorted to barbering simply for amusement, and under
the circumstances he would give me a professional sitting gratuitously.

It has always been a cherished ambition with me to have my head surveyed
and staked out scientifically; SO I told him at once he might take it
and look it over.

"My friend," said I, as I gracefully described an imaginary aureole
about my brain factory, "you abolish the poll-tax. I grant you full
leave to explore."

This was the first time I ever had my head examined. The whole of me, it
is true, was once examined before a Trial Justice; but as that was years
ago, and it was "the other boy" that was to blame, I refrain from
incorporating the details into the history of our country.

It occurred to me that old Scissors couldn't have been much of a
scholar; at all events he breathed very hard for an educated man, and he
had a rough, muscular way of moving his fingers about my upper story,
that made those regions ache every time he touched them. You may fancy
my feelings. I certainly didn't fancy _his_.

For the benefit of those who come after us, (I don't refer to Sheriffs
and Constables, so much as I do to posterity,) I append a few results of
the gentleman's vigorous researches.

       *       *       *

"There's a great deal of surface here; in fact, everybody that is
acquainted with this head must be struck at once with its superficial
contents."

"Thickness--obvious. Great breadth between the ears, indicating
longevity. You will never die of teething, or cholera infantum; nor is
it likely you will ever become a murderess.

"Forehead, large and imposing; that is, it might impose on people who
don't know you.

"Your intellect may be pronounced massive, dropsical, in fact. You have
brilliant talents, but your bump of cash payments is remarkably small.

"Locality, 20 to 30. You are always somewhere, or just going there.
Eventuality, 18 carat fine; absorption, 99 per cent. This means you will
eventually absorb a good deal of borrowed money.

"I find here acquisitiveness and secretiveness enough to stock an entire
Board of Aldermen and a Congressional Committee."

"Ambition, combativeness, and destructiveness are all on a colossal
scale. Happily they are balanced by gigantic caution, else you would be
in imminent danger of subverting the liberties of your country.

"If I owned that sanguine temperament of yours, I should proceed at once
to marry into President GRANT'S family, and take some foreign mission.

"You're a good feeder. Alimentiveness and order well developed. No man
better fitted to order a waiter around. From the immature condition of
your organ of benevolence, I shouldn't care, however, to be the waiter.

"Self esteem doesn't seem to have been kept back by the drought.

"Ideality, I discover from the depression in the S. W. corner, is
missing. Nature beautifully compensates this loss by making language
very full--more words than ideas. In profane language, I dare say, now,
you are particularly gifted.

"In one respect your head resembles that of the Father of His Country.
It lacks adhesiveness. So does GEORGE'S--on the postage stamps.

"Unlike most subjects, your organ of firmness is not confined to any one
spot, but is spread over the entire skull. This phenomenon is due to
your being what we technically call 'mule-headed'--a fine specimen
which--"

"Excuse me," said I, unwilling any longer to impose on his good nature,
"I feel I must make sure of that other train, so I will just trouble you
for that organ of firmness and the rest of them. I never travel without
them." Then, hurrying all my phrenology into my hat, I started down the
street.

I wonder he didn't say something about my memory's being below
par--somehow I quite forgot to pay him for shaving me.

Yours, without recourse,

SARSFIELD YOUNG.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: VERY "HARD CIDER."

THE PIPPINS OF THE JOHN REAL DEMOCRACY, (MESSRS. MORRISSEY, O'BRIEN, AND
FOX,) GETTING THEIR LAST SQUEEZE FROM GOVERNOR HOFFMAN.]

       *       *       *       *       *

HIRAM GREEN IN GOTHAM.

He Strays among Sharpers, and "Sees the Elephant."

There's many things in the big city which pleases me, and causes us
_all_ to feel hily tickled over our success as a Republic.

At the present writin', many furrin' nations would give all their old
butes and shoes if, like us, they could throw their roolers overboard
every 4 years, and have a new deel.

Our institutions are, many of 'em, sound: altho' I've diskivered to my
sorrer, that some of the inhabitants of New York are about as
puselanermus a set of dead-beats which ever stood up.

While sojernin' here, my distinguished looks kicked up quite a sensation
wherever I put in an appearance. On one occasion, a man stepped up to me
who thought I was a banker, and richer than Creosote, and wanted me to
change a $100 bill. I diden't do it. Not much. No, sir-ee!--they
coulden't fool the old man on that ancient dodge.

But, friend PUNCHINELLO, to my disgust and shagrin', I must acknolidge
the corn, and say, I hain't quite so soon as I allers give myself credit
for bein', as the sekel of this letter will show.

Last Saturday P.M. I was a sailin' down Dye Street with my bloo cotton
umbreller under my arm, feelin' all so fine and so gay.

When near the corner of West Street I turned around just in time to see
a ragged boy pick up a pocket-book.

As the afoursaid boy started to run off, a well dressed lookin' man
ketched him by the cote coller.

"What in thunder are you about?" says the boy.

"That pocket-book belongs to this old gentleman," said the man, pintin'
to me. "I saw him drop it."

"No it don't, nether," said the boy, tryin' to break away, "and I want
yer to let go my cote coller."

The infatuated youth then tried his level best to jerk away, while his
capturer yanked and cuffed him, ontil the boy sot up a cryin'.

I notissed as the youth turned around that he partly opened the wallet,
which was chock full of greenbax.

A thought suddenly struck me. That 'ere boy looked as if he was depraved
enuff to steel the shoe-strings off'n the end of a Chinaman's cue, so
the Monongohalian's hair woulden't stay braided.

Thinks I, if the young raskel should keep that pocket-book, like as not
he mite buy a fashinable soot of close and enter on a new career of
crime, and finally fetch up as a ward polertician.

I must confess, that as I beheld that wallet full of bills, my mouth did
water rather freely, and I made up my mind, if wuss come to wusser, I
would not allow too much _temptashun_ to get in that boy's way. The man
turned to me and says:

"Stranger, this is your pocket-book, for I'le swear I saw you drop it."

What could a poor helpless old man like me do in euch a case, Mister
PUNCHINELLO? That man was willin' to sware that I dropped it, and I
larnt enuff about law, when I was Gustise of the Peece, to know I
coulden't swear I diden't drop it, and any court would decide agin me;
at the same time my hands itched to get holt of the well filled wallet.

I trembled all over for fear a policeman, who was standin' on the
opposite corner, mite come over and stick in his lip.

But no! like the wooden injuns before cigar stores, armed with a
tommyhawk and scalpin' knife, these city petroleums, bein' rather
slippery chaps, hain't half so savage as they look.

When the boy heerd the man say I owned the pocket-book he caved in, and
began to blubber. Said he, whimperin':

"Well--I--want--a--re--ward--for--findin' the--pocket-bo--hoo--ok."

The well dressed individual, still holdin' onto the boy, then said to
me:

"My friend, I'me a merchant, doin' bizziness on Broadway, at 4-11-44.
You've had a narrer escape from losin' your pocket-book. Give this rash
youth $50, to encourage him in bein' honest in the futer, and a glorious
reward awaits you. Look at me, sir!" said he, vehemently; "the turnin'
pint of my life was similar to this depraved youth's; but, sir! a reward
from a good lookin', beneverlent old gent like you, made a man of me,
and to-day I'me President of a Society for the _Penny-Ante_ corruption
of good morrils,' and there hain't a judge in the city who wouldn't give
me a home for the pleasure of my company."

Such a man, I knew, woulden't lie about seein' me drop that pocket-book.
I took another look at the Guardian (?) of the public peace, morrils,
etc., who, when he was on his _Beat_, haden't the least objection to
anybody else bein' on _their beat_. He wasen't lookin' our way, but was
star-gazin', seein' if the sines was rite for him to go and take another
drink.

"You are sure you saw me drop this wallet?" said I, addressin' the
President of the Penny-antee Society.

"I'le take my affidavy on it," said he.

I pulled out $50 and handed it to the boy, who handed me the pocket-book.

"Mrs. GREEN! Mrs. GREEN!" soliloquised I, as I walked away, feelin' as
rich as if I held a good fat goverment offis, "if you could only see
your old man now, methinks you'd feel sorry that you hid all of his
close one mornin' last spring, so he coulden't go and attend a barn
raisin'. Yes, madam, your talented husband has struck ile."

I stepped in a stairway to count my little fortin. I was very much
agitated. The wallet was soon opened; when--

"Ye ministers fallen from grace, defend us!" was the first exclamation
which bust 4th from my lips; for I hope to be flambusticated if I hadn't
gone and paid $50 for a lot of brown paper, rapt up into patent medesin
advertisements, printed like greenbax.

For a few minnits I was crazier than a loon.

I rusht madly into the street, runnin' into an old apple woman, nockin'
her "gally west."

I quickly jumped to my feet and begun hollerin':

"Murder! Thieves! Robbers!"

The Policemen scattered, while a crowd of ragged urchins colected about
me. "My youthful vagabones," roared I, as loud as I could scream, "bring
along your stuffed wallets. The market price of brown paper is $50 an
ounce on call.--If you are lookin' for a greenhorn, I'me your man."

I then broke my umbreller over a lamp-post, and button-hold a passer by,
offerin him a $100 if he'd send me to a loonatic asilum.

Seein' a sine on the opposite corner which read: "Weigher's Office," I
rusht wildly in, and said to a man:

"Captin, I've been _litened_. If you've got such a thing as a pair of
apothecary's scales about your premises, dump me on and give me the
figgers."

I then tried to jump through a winder, but the man caught me by the cote
tails, and haulin' me back, sot me down into a cheer.

I soon got cooled down, when I told the man how I'de been swindled, and
asked him what I had better do.

"Do?" said he, laffin' as if heed bust. "My advice is, for you to take
the next train for your home, and then charge your loss to the acc't of
seein' the elefant."

It hain't often I git took in, but that time I was swallered,
specturcals, white hat and all, as slick as if I'de been buttered all
over.

I don't intend to let Mrs. GREEN know anything about this little
adventoor, but just as like as not, some day when I hain't thinking she
will worm it out of me, when Mariar will no doubt say:

"Sarved you rite, you old ignoramus; that's what you git for stoppin'
takin' the weekly noosepapers, because they won't print the darned
nonsents you set up to rite, when you orter be to bed and asleep."

Ewers, lite as a fether,

HIRAM GREEN, Esq.,

_Lait Gustise of the Peece._


       *       *       *       *       *


A Serious Complication.

The English language is a "mighty onsartin" one. Here, now, in a
magazine sketch, we find it stated that one of the characters of the
story was "as rich as CROESUS, and a good fellow to boot." Vernacularly,
this is correct; and yet so equivocal is it that it puzzles one to think
why the acquisition of wealth should subject the holder of it to the
liability of being kicked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Enough Said.

"Modern physiologists," said the Doctor, "have arrived at the conclusion
that man begins as a cell."

"And what about woman?" returned the Scalper, "doesn't she begin as a
sell, continue as a sell, and depart as a sell?"

"She does," replied the doctor.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Relative Question.

Would the marriage of a Daughter of a Canon to a Son of a Gun come
within the laws prohibiting marriage between relatives too nearly
connected?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE (JOHN) REAL DEMOCRACY OF NEW YORK CITY.]

       *       *       *       *       *

A CRABBED HISTORY.

Most people have a peculiar fondness for crabs. A dainty succulent soft
shell crab, nicely cooked and well browned, tempts the eye of the
epicure and makes his mouth water. Even a hard shell is not to be
despised when no other is attainable. We eat them with great gusto,
thinking they are "so nice," without considering for a moment that they
have feelings and sentiments of their own, or are intended for any other
purpose than the gratification of our palate. But that is a mistake
which I will try to rectify in order that the _bon vivant_ may enjoy
hereafter the pleasures of a mental and bodily feast conjointly.

Most crabs are hatched from eggs, and begin life in a very small way.
They float round in the water, at first, without really knowing what
they are about. They have but little sense to start with, but after a
while improve and begin to strike out in a blind instinctive way, which,
after a few efforts, resolves itself into real genuine swimming. They
commence walking about the same time. Awkward straggling steps, to be
sure, but they get over the ground, and that is the most they care for.

When they are about a month old they begin to feel that life has its
realities, and that they must do something towards the end for which
they were made. The thought is faint at first, but by degrees grows
weightier, till at last they can stand it no longer, and, making a great
effort to throw off the incubus of babyhood that weighs so heavily upon
them, they burst open the back door of their shell and slowly creep out
backwards. It takes about five minutes for them to get entirely out,
head, legs and all, and then for a moment or two they gaze in
stupefaction at their old shell, amazed to find that they have, by their
own efforts, unaided and alone, accomplished such a wonderful change.

The thought is overwhelming. It fills them with pride; rejoicingly they
exult, and swell with gratification. This state of self-gratulation
lasts about twenty minutes, at the end of which time they have increased
their bulk to nearly double its former size, and they remain so.

They can't get back into the old shell now, for it won't fit them, and
as there is no other for them to go into, the only thing left for them
to do is to build another house.

It takes three or four days before they get fairly to work, and during
this time they are called soft-shell crabs. This stage is particularly
dangerous to the delicate creatures, for they, in their tender beauty,
are so attractive to hungry fishes that it is really a wonder any
escape. Tender, helpless, innocent and beautiful, they are almost sure
to be victimized and gormandized.

Some, however, escape the fate intended for them, and in a few days
begin to enjoy life in a crabbed sort of a way. Another month passes on.
They become restless and uneasy, and feel that it won't do to stay too
long in one place. They think they had better make another change, and
so this time, in a more self-confident manner, they pack up and move out
at the back door again. They are no more provident now, however, than
they were at first, for, after having given up the old house, they have
no new one to move into. They are not troubled as we are with
house-hunting; they are good builders, and can make one to suit
themselves. A wise provision of nature, for these interesting creatures
are really obliged monthly to go out doors to grow.

This state is to them doubly dangerous. Mankind they always have to
fear, but now they are tempting to their own race. A wicked old crab
goes out for a stroll. The walk gives him an appetite; he looks around
for something to eat and spies a younger brother just moving.
Treacherously be plants himself behind a stone or shell, and watches the
process, chuckling in his inmost stomach over the dainty meal in
prospect. The youthful one has just got clear of his old home and its
restraints, and is delighting in his freedom, when up walks the vampire,
strikes him a blow on his defenceless head, knocks the life out of him,
and then sits down to a dinner of soft-shell crab. He is an old
sportsman, and enjoys exceedingly the meal gained by his own prowess.

Dinner over, he wipes his claws on the muddy table-cloth and walks out
for his digestion. Off in the distance he spies a young gentleman crab
making love to a beautiful female. He looks at her with a discriminating
eye. Sees she is fair to look upon, and thinks he would like to be
acquainted. He makes several sideway moves in the direction, ungraceful,
but satisfactory to himself, and as he advances his admiration
increases, his courage improves; he feels almost heroic. The observant
lover with staring eyes perceives the advancing strides of another
gentleman crab, and instantly, seized with jealous fears, clasps his
_inamorata_ to his shelly breast with his numerous little legs, holds
her tightly so that she can't fall, and walks off on his hands.

The old cannibal observes the change of base, feels insulted at the
implied distrust, and resolves to have satisfaction. Increasing his
efforts, he soon overtakes the runaway lovers, challenges his rival by
giving him a dig with his claw, and tells him to "come out and show
himself a crab." Of course no crab of spirit is going to receive an
insult before his beloved and not resent it; with one painful quiver of
his little legs, he sets the lady crab down, and then the two amorous
lovers proceed to deadly combat. Love strengthens the young crab's
heart. Justice nerves his arm; and soon a lucky blow from the sharp claw
pierces in a vital part the hardened sinner, who, with a gulp, gives up
the contest and his life at once.

An exultant shout bubbles up in the water, and then the heroic defender
of crabbed maidenhood leads his beloved to view the remains of this
ravager of hard-shell rights.

They rejoice over the fallen adversary a while, and then, to make their
happiness more complete, and to prosper his wooing, the victor invites
his love to dine on the tender part of the victim.

The invitation is gladly accepted, and they enjoy a delicious meal,
rendered doubly tasteful from the fact that they are feasting on an
enemy.

The facts deduced from the above history prove that crabs have tastes
and feelings just as mankind have. They are gallant to their females;
never engage in combat with the weaker sex; fight and kill each other
when angry; love good eating, and are cannibalistic--which last habit
they may have learned from their ancestors of the Feejee Islands.

       *       *       *       *       *

BAITED BREATH.--That of the boy who had "wums fur bait" in his mouth.

       *       *       *       *       *

OCTOBER JOTTINGS.

Attracted by the dulcet strains of a brass band, a day or two since,
PUNCHINELLO ascended to the summit of the N.E. tower of his residence,
looking from which he beheld a target company all with crimson shirts
ablaze marching up the Bowery. Then, glancing over towards Long Island,
he observed that Nature was already assuming her russet robes, which
circumstance, combined with that of the target company, reminded him
that the shooting season had just commenced. A few hints to young
sportsmen, then, from so old a one as PUNCHINELLO, will not, be hopes,
be taken amiss--not even though, in shooting phrase, a miss is generally
as good as a mile.

Before taking the field, look well to your shooting-irons.
Fowling-pieces are far more apt to Get Foul while they are lying away
during the off season, than when they are taken out for a day's sport by
the fowlers.

On releasing your gun from its summer prison, always examine it
carefully, to ascertain whether it is loaded. This you can do by looking
down into the barrel and touching the trigger with your toe. If your
head is blown off, then you may be sure that the gun was loaded.
Otherwise not.

Should your gun be a breech-loader, always load it at the muzzle. This
will show that you know better than the man who made it, or, at least,
that he is no better than you.

If you are a novice in gunnery it will be safest for you to put the shot
in before the powder. By doing this you will not only provide against
possible accidents, but will secure for yourself the reputation of being
a very safe man to go out shooting with.

When you go out with your gun, always dress in a shootable costume. For
instance, if you want to bag lots of Dead Rabbits, TWEED will be the
best stuff you can wear--especially about November 8th, on which day you
will be certain to find Some Quail about the polling places. (N.B. They
are beginning to quail already.)

The best time to acquire the art of shooting flying is fly time. Always
carry a whiskey flask about you, so that you can practice at Swallows.

When you hear the drum of the ruffed grouse, steal silently through the
thicket and let drive in the direction of the sound. Should you bring
down a target company instead of a ruffed grouse, so much the better. It
will only be bagging ruffs of another kind, and by silencing their drums
you will have conferred an obligation upon humanity.

There is much diversity of opinion regarding the best kind of dog for
fowling purposes. It all depends upon what work you want your dog to do
for you. If you want to have birds pointed, a pointer is best for your
purpose. If set, a setter. But if you want a dog that will go in and
kill without either pointing or setting, be sure that the Iron Dog is
the dog for your money. You can procure one of Staunch Blood by
application at Police Head-Quarters.

Before going out for a day's sport, resolve yourself into a committee of
one for the preservation of choice ornithological specimens. By this we
do not mean that you are to set up in business as a taxidermist, but
that you are bound--if a true sportsman--to protect the song birds, and
the birds that are useful in destroying noxious vermin, and all the
beautiful feathered creatures that ornament our woods, and fields, and
parks, from the depredations of the ignorant, loutish, pestilent,
pernicious pot-hunter. The Sportsmen's Clubs that have been organized
throughout the country should be supported by every true sportsman; and
if you lay a thick stick vigorously across the back of the first fool
you see about to kill Cock Robin, you will have established a very
efficacious Sportsman's Club of your own, and will have earned the best
regards of Mr. PUNCHINELLO to boot--by which he means, if you choose,
that you have his leave and license to boot the fellow into the bargain.

       *       *       *       *       *

MORE ABOUT CHIGNONS.

The chignon is coming to the front again. By this we do not mean that it
is worn, or likely to be worn before--in saying which the word "before"
is not used by us in its acceptation of previously, but in that of
front; although, now that we come to think of it, the _chignon_
certainly has been worn before, as may be seen by consulting
old-fashioned prints, in which it is shown worn behind. This, to the
ordinary mind, may seem rather confused; and so it is; but what else
could you expect from a writer when he has got _chignon_ upon the brain?

For newspapers the _chignon_ is just now a teeming subject. Every day or
so somebody writes to a paper, saying that be has discovered a new kind
of parasite, hatched by the genial warmth of woman's nape from some
deleterious padding or other used in the manufacture of her _chignon_.
Sometimes it is vegetable stuff, sometimes animal, but it always teems
with pedicular creatures akin to that low and vulgar kind not usually
recognized in polite society. All these horrors come and and don't make
much difference in the _chignon_ market; but PUNCHINELLO has a new one
that is calculated to create a sensation--about the nape of the female
neck--and here it is.

In the beech forests of Hungary, as is well known to Danubian explorers,
there exists a very remarkable breed of pigs, one of their peculiarities
being that they are covered with wool instead of with bristles. These
pigs are shorn regularly every year, like sheep. Their wool, which is
very stiff and curly, is used for stuffing cushions and mattresses of
the cheap and nasty kind. Since _chignons_ have come into fashion, a
vast amount of pig's wool has been imported for their manufacture. By
microscopic investigation the wool of the Hungary pig has been found
swarming with _trichinae_; to a fearful extent. Now, it is easy to
imagine that the _trichinae_ obtained from a hungry pig must be of a
very insatiable and ravenous disposition, and this is but too often
realized by the silly wearers of the porcine _chignons_, into whose
brains, (when they happen to have any,) the horrible little parasites
worm their way in myriads, rendering their hapless victims pig-headed to
an extent that defies description either with pen or pencil.

The Pig-faced Woman exhibited some time ago in Europe was once a very
pretty girl, her hideous deformity being the result of wearing a
_chignon_ stuffed with Hungary pigs' wool.

In purchasing a pig _chignon_, then, the Girl of the Period had better
look out that she does not get "too much pork for a shilling."

       *       *       *       *       *

MATCHING THE MATCHLESS.

Matchmaking has always been traditionally supposed to be the chief end
of woman. No wonder that, with the spread of the new theories of woman's
rights, therefore, we find them invading departments of industry which
were formerly supposed to be peculiarly the domain of the stronger sex.
We have recently seen running matches, swimming matches, rowing matches,
and other fancy matches, made by women. And why not? The women are wise
in thus preparing themselves for proficiency in the arts of primary
elections, ballot stuffing and the rest, incidental to untrammelled
suffrage.

In regard to this, also, it may not be amiss to suggest that this
passion for match-making lies at the bottom of the recent increase in
divorce, which so alarms some timid moralists. Certain it is that easy
divorce enlarges the opportunities for its gratification, and to be
"fancy" and "free" is no longer a charm peculiar only to "maiden
meditation."

       *       *       *       *       *

HISTORY FACTORY.

Card to the Public.

The undersigned, having recently increased their facilities for the
manufacture of History upon an unusually large scale, would hereby
announce to their patrons and the public in general that they have
associated with them Messrs. VICTOR EMANUEL and General TROCHU.

LOUIS NAPOLEON,

M. BISMARCK,

WM. O'PRUSSIA,

       *       *       *       *       *

Commercial.

A proof of the present great depression in the Whaling business is the
fact that the editor of the _Sun_ still walks about unflogged.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: HORSE-CAR AMENITIES.

_Conductor_. "Wanted to get off, did you?--Then why in thunder didn't
you say so?"]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHOICE OF PARIS (IN AMERICA.)

    One drink, dear friend, before we part--
      Before I tempt the shining sea;
    One drink to pledge each constant heart--
      Yet stay, what shall the tipple be?

    My eyes are dazed with bar-room "signs"
      In which, I pray, shall friendship conquer?
    Can alien I drink "native" wines?
      Are Jew-lips Christian tipple, _mon coeur_?

    This "cobbler"--is't a heeling drink?
      A "smash" were surely inauspicious;
    _Toute de-suite_, two "sours"--yet I think
      Ah! _qu'est-ce-qui c'est!_--acetate is vicious!

    _Garcon!_ two "skins"--the name is 'cute---
      You Yankees "twig" the pharmaceutical;
    But hold! art sure the flay-vor'll suit?
      Will it not smack too much of cuticle?

    No, boy, no "skins." Let's try some beer,
      A milder fluid for to-day;
    Ottawa bring us--_c'est a dire_,
      Some beer that keeps the 'ot away.

    No? Well, some ale: in limpid Bass
      We'll drown our thirst and parting grief;
    Come drink--_arretez!_ this _must_ pass--
      'Twould look too much like bas-relief!

    The hour arrives; our lips are dry;
      What _shall_ it be? Oh, name it for me!
    A _tasse_ of gin? I drink and fly
      To toss upon the ocean stormy.

       *       *       *       *       *


"NOTHING LIKE LEATHER."

Freedom of action is one of the greatest boons enjoyed by mankind in
modern days. Its rate of progress is encouraging, especially since the
Liberal Club of this city has taken it under its protection. It is a
very significant association, is the Liberal Club; rather iconoclastic,
to be sure, but only a little ahead of the times, perhaps, in that
respect; Some of our cherished forms of speech have already been
rendered obsolete by the Liberal Club. It used to be such a clincher to
say, when one wanted to enforce a point by indicating an impossibility,
"I will eat my boots unless"--etc., etc. That clincher has gone to the
place whither good clinchers go, forever. At a late meeting of the
Liberal Club, Professor VAN DER WEYDE contributed to the evening
collation a pudding made of an old boot. The pudding was garnished with
the wooden pegs that had kept the boot together, sole and body, while it
walked the earth. The boot-jack with which the original source of the
pudding used to be pulled off was also exhibited, and excited great
interest. It is the intention, of the Professor to subject this
implement to some process by which it will be resolved into farina, or
sawdust, and then to make a Jack Pudding of it. Many of the ladies and
gentlemen present partook of the boot pudding, and pronounced it
excellent. One lady, (a member of Sorosis, we believe,) said that she
thought it tasted like a pear. The Professor assured her, however, that
he had used but one boot in making it, not a pair. Altogether, the
pudding was a success. Freedom of action had been vindicated, and the
absurd prejudice that had hitherto prevented men from utilizing their
old boots as food, except in extreme cases, was shattered with one blow.

       *       *       *       *       *

PANOPLY FOR OUR POLICE.

PUNCHINELLO felicitates the Municipal Police Force on the magnificent
new shields with which the manly breasts of its members are decorated.
Nevertheless, PUNCHINELLO considers it sheer mockery to call that a
shield by which nothing is shielded. A buckle might as well be called a
buckler as the policeman's badge a shield. Already our noble skirmishers
of the side-walk are fully provided for the offensive, and, considering
the risks run by them from the roughs, the toughs and the gruffs, it is
high time that they were furnished with something in the defensive line.
Curb-chain undershirts have been suggested, but an objection to their
use is that links of them are apt to be carried into the interior
anatomy by pistol bullets, thus introducing a surplus of iron into the
blood,--an accession which is apt to steel the heart of the officer thus
experimented on, and so render him deaf to the cries of innocence in
distress. PUNCHINELLO suggests, then, that the policeman's shield should
_be_ a shield. Let it be made sufficiently large to cover the most
vulnerable portion of the person, as shown in the annexed design. If
made of gong-metal, so much the better, as the wearer could then ring
out signals upon it with his locust far more effectively than by the
present ridiculous mode of beating up rowdydow upon the flag-stones.
Although our gallant Municipal Blue is never backward in facing danger,
yet it might be judicious for him to wear a shield upon his back as well
as upon his front, because it is just possible that, in case of a row,
his large, heavy boots might be conveying him away in a direction
diametrically opposite to the spot at which the shooting was going on.

[Illustration]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ARE OFFERING                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                    EXTRAORDINARY BARGAINS                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                    LADIES' ENGLISH HOSE,                     |
  |                     FULL REGULAR MAKES,                      |
  |                From 25 cents per pair upward.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                            ALSO,                             |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GENTLEMENS' HALF HOSE,                    |
  |           EXTRA QUALITY, 25 cents per pair upward.           |
  |                                                              |
  |                       LADIES LINES OF                        |
  |                   Ladies' and Gentlemens'                    |
  |                  Silk and Merino Underwear.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                          BROADWAY,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              8th Avenue, 9th and 10th Streets.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                      Grand Exposition.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. STEWART & CO.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         HAVE OPENED                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                   A Splendid Assortment of                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                     PARIS MADE DRESSES,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |          From Worth E Pingnet and other Celebrated           |
  |                            Makers                            |
  |                                                              |
  |                    ALSO, LARGE ADDITIONS,                    |
  |                  OF THEIR OWN MANUFACTURE,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |           Cut and Trimmed by Artists equal, if not           |
  |                superior, to any in this city.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Millinery, Bonnets, & Hats                  |
  |          Eligantly Trimmed, from Virot's and other           |
  |          Modletes of the highest Parisian standing.          |
  |                                                              |
  |            The Prices of the Above are Extremely             |
  |                         Attractive.                          |
  |                                                              |
  |                           BROADWAY                           |
  |                                                              |
  |              4th Avenue, 9th and 10th Streets.               |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                   Extraordinary Bargains.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                     A. T. Stewart & Co.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                         ARE OFFERING                         |
  |                      GRAY MIXED SUITS,                       |
  |             MADE OF BEST QUALITY FRINGED CHEVIOT             |
  |                      SUITINGS, $8 EACH.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                 Scotch Plaid Fringed Suits,                  |
  |                 VERY HANDSOME, ALSO $8 EACH.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                      WATERPROOF SUITS,                       |
  |                WITH DEEP OVERSKITS, $10 EACH.                |
  |                                                              |
  |                       A LARGE STOCK OF                       |
  |                     POPLIN ALPACA SUITS,                     |
  |                   CHOICE SHADES OF COLOR,                    |
  |                    From $12 each upward.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                          Heavy Rich                          |
  |                    SILK AND POPLIN SUITS,                    |
  |           ELEGANTLY TRIMMED, FROM $60 EACH UPWARD            |
  |                                                              |
  |                  ONE CASE PARIS-MADE SUITS,                  |
  |                 One Case Handsome Millinery,                 |
  |                    THREE CASES CHILDREN'S                    |
  |                    Part, and London Made                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             Dresses, Suits, Robes and Underwear,             |
  |              One Case Pattern Velvet and Cloth.              |
  |            Cloaks, Sacques and Richly Embroidered            |
  |                      Breakfast Jackets,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                  AT VERY ATTRACTIVE PRICES.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                           BROADWAY                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               4TH AVE., 9TH AND 10TH STREETS,                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  | The first number of this Illustrated Humorous and Satirical  |
  |   Weekly Paper was issued under date of April 2, 1870. The   |
  |   Press and the Public in every State and Territory of the   |
  |     Union endorse it as the best paper of the kind ever      |
  |                    published in America.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                  CONTENTS ENTIRELY ORIGINAL                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Subscription for one year, (with $2.00 premium,)  . .  $4.00 |
  |   "         "  six months, (without premium,) . . .     2.00 |
  |   "         "  three months,  . . . . . . . . . . .     1.00 |
  | Single copies mailed free, for  . . . . . . . . . . . .  .10 |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | "We offer the following elegant premiums of L. PRANG & CO'S  |
  |            CHROMOS for subscriptions as follows:             |
  |                                                              |
  |              A copy of paper for one year, and               |
  |                                                              |
  |     "The Awakening," (a Litter of Puppies.) Half chromo.     |
  | Size 8-3/8 by 11-1/8 ($2.00 picture,)--for. . . . . .  $4.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $3.00 chromos:                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  _Wild Roses._ 12-1/8 x 9.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Dead Game. 11-1/8 x 8-5/8.                  |
  |                                                              |
  | Easter Morning. 6-3/5 x 10-1/4--for. . . . . . . . .   $5.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $5.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                      Group of Chickens;                      |
  |                     Group of Ducklings;                      |
  |                       Group of Quails.                       |
  |                      Each 10 x 12-1/8.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                The Poultry Yard. 10-1/8 x 14                 |
  |                                                              |
  |        The Barefoot Boy; Wild Fruit. Each 9-3/4 x 13.        |
  |                                                              |
  | Pointer and Quail; Spaniel and Woodcock. 10 x 12 for   $6.50 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $6.00 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                     The Baby in Trouble;                     |
  |                   The Unconscious Sleeper;                   |
  |      The Two Friends. (Dog and Child.) Each 13 x 16-3/4      |
  |                                                              |
  |           Spring; Summer; Autumn 12-1/8 x 16-1/2.            |
  |                                                              |
  | The Kid's Play Ground. 11 x 17-1/2--for . . . . .  .   $7.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                   following $7.50 chromos                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                  Strawberries and Baskets.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    Cherries and Baskets.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Currants. Each 13 x 18.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |              Horses in a Storm. 22-1/4 x 15-1/4              |
  |                                                              |
  | Six Central Park Views. (A set.) 9-1/8 x 4-1/2--for .  $8.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |               A copy of paper for one year and               |
  |                                                              |
  |         Six American Landscapes. (A set.) 4-3/8 x 9,         |
  | price $9.00--for  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   $9.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |        A copy of paper for one year and either of the        |
  |                    following $10 chromos:                    |
  |                                                              |
  |        Sunset in California. (Bierstadt) 18-1/8 x 12         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   Easter Morning. 14 x 21.                   |
  |                                                              |
  |             Corregio's Magdalen. 12-1/2 x 16-1/8             |
  |                                                              |
  |       Summer Fruit, and Autumn Fruit. (Half chromes.)        |
  |   15-1/2 x 10-1/2, (companions, price $10.00 for the two),   |
  |                                                 --for $10.00 |
  |                                                              |
  |  Remittances should be made in P.O. Orders, Drafts, or Bank  |
  | Checks on New York, or Registered letters. The paper will be |
  |    sent from the first number, (April 2d, 1870,) when not    |
  |                      otherwise ordered.                      |
  |                                                              |
  |  Postage of paper is payable at the office where received,   |
  |     twenty cents per year, or five cents per quarter, in     |
  |   advance; the CHROMOS will be _mailed free on receipt of    |
  |                            money.                            |
  |                                                              |
  |    CANVASSERS WANTED, to whom liberal commissions will be    |
  |        given. For special terms address the Company.         |
  |                                                              |
  |  The first ten numbers will be sent to any one desirous of   |
  |   seeing the paper before subscribing, for SIXTY CENTS. A    |
  |   specimen copy sent to any one desirous of canvassing or    |
  |       getting up a club, on receipt of postage stamp.        |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |        P.O. Box 2783. No. 83 Nassau Street. New York.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AGGRAVATING.

_Sidewalk Merchant_. "BUY A BUNDLE OF TOOTHPICKS, BOSS--ONLY THREE
CENTS." _Old Gent_. "TOOTHPICKS?--WHY, I'VE JUST BIN AND HAD MY LAST
TOOTH OUT!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |          "THE PRINTING HOUSE OF THE UNITED STATES"           |
  |                             AND                              |
  |          "THE UNITED STATES ENVELOPE MANUFACTORY."           |
  |                                                              |
  |                    GEORGE F. NESBITT & CO                    |
  |                                                              |
  | 163,165,167,169 Pearl St., & 73,75,77,79 Pine St., New-York. |
  |                                                              |
  |                     Execute all kinds of                     |
  |                          PRINTING,                           |
  |                     Furnish all kinds of                     |
  |                         STATIONERY,                          |
  |                      Make all kinds of                       |
  |                         BLANK BOOKS,                         |
  |                 Execute the finest styles of                 |
  |                         LITHOGRAPHY                          |
  |                 Makes the Best and Cheapest                  |
  |                          ENVELOPES                           |
  |                 Ever offered to the Public.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |   They have made all the pre-paid Envelopes for the United   |
  |States Post-Office Department for the past 16 years, and have |
  |  INVARIABLY BEEN THE LOWEST BIDDERS. Their Machinery is the  |
  |   most complete, rapid and economical known in the trade.    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                Travelers West and South-West                 |
  |                 Should bear in mind that the                 |
  |                         ERIE RAILWAY                         |
  |          IS BY FAR THE CHEAPEST, QUICKEST, AND MOST          |
  |                      COMFORTABLE ROUTE,                      |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |       Making Direct and Sure Connection at CINCINNATI,       |
  |                        with all Lines                        |
  |                       By Rail or River                       |
  |            For NEW ORLEANS, LOUISVILLE,  MEMPHIS,            |
  |                    ST. LOUIS, VICKSBURG,                     |
  |                      NASHVILLE, MOBILE,                      |
  |             And All Points South and South-west.             |
  |                                                              |
  | Its DRAWING-ROOM and SLEEPING COACHES on all Express Trains, |
  |  running through to Cincinnati without change, are the most  |
  |   elegant and spacious used upon any Road in this country,   |
  |   being fitted up in the most elaborate manner, and having   |
  |  every modern improvement introduced for the comfort of its  |
  |   patrons; running upon the BROAD GAUGE; revealing scenery   |
  | along the Line unequalled upon this Continent, and rendering |
  |   a trip over the ERIE, one of the delights and pleasures    |
  |              of this life not to be forgotten.               |
  |                                                              |
  |   By applying at the Offices of the Erie Railway Co., Nos.   |
  |  241, 529 and 957 Broadway; 205 Chambers St.; 38 Greenwich   |
  |   St.; cor. 125th St. and Third Avenue, Harlem; 338 Fulton   |
  |  St., Brooklyn: Depots foot of Chambers Street, and foot of  |
  |  23d St., New York; and the Agents at the principal hotels,  |
  | travelers can obtain just the Ticket they desire, as well as |
  |                all the necessary information.                |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   VOL. I, ENDING SEPT. 24,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |                    BOUND IN EXTRA CLOTH,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                        IS NOW READY.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                        PRICE $2. 50.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |    Sent free by any Publisher on receipt of price, or by     |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                 83 Nassau Street, New York.                  |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |    PRANG'S LATEST PUBLICATIONS: "Joy of Autumn," "Prairie    |
  |            Flowers," "Lake George," "West Point."            |
  |                                                              |
  | PRANG'S CHROMOS Sold in all Art Stores throughout the world. |
  |                                                              |
  | PRANG'S ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE sent free on receipt of stamp. |
  |                                                              |
  |                   L. PRANG & CO., Boston.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |   With a large and varied experience in the management and   |
  | publication of a paper of the class herewith submitted, and  |
  |  with the still more positive advantage of an Ample Capital  |
  |               to justify the undertaking, the                |
  |                                                              |
  |                  PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                   OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |         Presents to the public for approval, the new         |
  |                                                              |
  |              ILLUSTRATED HUMOROUS AND SATIRICAL              |
  |                                                              |
  |                        WEEKLY PAPER,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                         PUNCHINELLO,                         |
  |                                                              |
  |          The first number of which was issued under          |
  |                       date of April 2.                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                      ORIGINAL ARTICLES,                      |
  |                                                              |
  | Suitable for the paper, and Original Designs, or suggestive  |
  | ideas or sketches for illustrations, upon the topics of the  |
  |  day, are always acceptable and will be paid for liberally.  |
  |                                                              |
  |  Rejected communications cannot be returned, unless postage  |
  |                     stamps are inclosed.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |                            TERMS:                            |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy, per year, in advance....................... $4.00  |
  |                                                              |
  | Single copies,......................................... .10  |
  |                                                              |
  |         A specimen copy will be mailed free upon the         |
  |                    receipt of ten cents.                     |
  |                                                              |
  |     One copy, with the Riverside Magazine, or any other      |
  |  magazine or paper, price, $2.50, for................. 5.50  |
  |                                                              |
  | One copy, with any magazine or paper, price, $4, for.. 7.00  |
  |                                                              |
  |  All communications, remittances, etc., to be addressed to   |
  |                                                              |
  |                 PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING CO.,                  |
  |                                                              |
  |                    No. 83 Nassau Street,                     |
  |                                                              |
  |             P. O. Box, 2783,          NEW YORK.              |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                                                              |
  |                 THE MYSTERY OF MR. E. DROOD.                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                  The New Burlesque Serial,                   |
  |                                                              |
  |              Written Expressly for PUNCHINELLO,              |
  |                                                              |
  |                              BY                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                       ORPHEUS C. KERR,                       |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  | Commenced in No. 11, will be continued weekly throughout the |
  |                            year.                             |
  |                                                              |
  | A sketch of the eminent author, written by his bosom friend, |
  |                 with superb illustrations of                 |
  |                                                              |
  |    1ST. THE AUTHOR'S PALATIAL RESIDENCE AT BEGAD'S HILL,     |
  |                TICKNOR'S FIELDS, NEW JERSEY.                 |
  |                                                              |
  | 2D. THE AUTHOR AT THE DOOR OF SAID PALATIAL RESIDENCE, taken |
  |  as he appears "Every Saturday," will also be found in the   |
  |                         same number.                         |
  |                                                              |
  |   Single Copies, for sale by all newsmen, (or mailed from    |
  |  this office, free,) Ten Cents. Subscription for One Year,   |
  |            one copy, with $2 Chromo Premium, $4.             |
  |                                                              |
  |  Those desirous of receiving the paper containing this new   |
  |    serial, which promises to be the best ever written by     |
  | ORPHEUS C. KERR, should subscribe now, to insure its regular |
  |                       receipt weekly.                        |
  |                                                              |
  |   We will send the first Ten Numbers of PUNCHINELLO to any   |
  |  one who wishes to see them, in view of subscribing, on the  |
  |                   receipt of SIXTY CENTS.                    |
  |                                                              |
  |                                                              |
  |                           Address,                           |
  |                                                              |
  |               PUNCHINELLO PUBLISHING COMPANY,                |
  |                                                              |
  |                        P.O. Box 2783                         |
  |                                                              |
  |                   83 Nassau St., New York.                   |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

GEO. W. WHEAT & Co, PRINTERS, No. 8 SPRUCE STREET.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punchinello, Vol. 2, No. 29, October
15, 1870, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCHINELLO, VOL. 2, NO. 29 ***

***** This file should be named 10047.txt or 10047.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/0/4/10047/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson,
Steve Schulze and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS," WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


